Criminal Justice Studies

A Critical Journal of Crime, Law and Society

ISSN: 1478-601X (Print) 1478-6028 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/gjup20

Crime and the composition of place: a micro-level longitudinal study of the (in)stability of street robbery hot spot locations and environments using Google Street View

Nathan T. Connealy & Peyton Toman

To cite this article: Nathan T. Connealy & Peyton Toman (2025) Crime and the composition of place: a micro-level longitudinal study of the (in)stability of street robbery hot spot locations and environments using Google Street View, Criminal Justice Studies, 38:4, 400-422, DOI: 10.1080/1478601X.2025.2571483

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/1478601X.2025.2571483

View supplementary material

Published online: 22 Oct 2025.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 118

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gjup20

CRIMINAL JUSTICE STUDIES                                2025, VOL. 38, NO. 4, 400–422  https://doi.org/10.1080/1478601X.2025.2571483

# Crime and the composition of place: a micro-level  longitudinal study of the (in)stability of street robbery hot  spot locations and environments using Google Street View

Nathan T. Connealy and Peyton Toman

Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice, University of Tampa, Tampa, FL, USA

# ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY  Received 9 May 2025   Accepted 20 September 2025 

This study simultaneously examines two foundational assumptions in  crime and place research: that hot spots are locationally static and that  their environmental compositions are dynamic over time. Using longitudinal Google Street View imagery and remote systematic social  observation, we assessed the locational stability and environmental  compositional change of Seattle’s most criminogenic street robbery  hot spots. The results indicate that hot spot locations were generally  static and time stable in the aggregate, but that the stability trajectories  of individual hot spots tended to vary across yearly intervals. Relatedly,  the environmental compositions of crime hot spots tended to be more  dynamic and changed more frequently than control locations in their  aggregate compositions, but individual features within hot spots varied  in their presence and degree of dynamicity compared to the paired  controls. The findings underscore the importance of using temporally  sequenced environmental data in place-based research and highlight  the need for individualized and situational hot spot crime reduction  strategies. The uniqueness of individual crime hot spots may require  case-by-case considerations in both research and practice.

KEYWORDS  Remote systematic social  observation; google street  view; crime hot spots; crime  and place; environmental  crime

Beyond the practitioner sphere, research has also theorized that the relationship  between  crime  and  place  is  critical  to  determining  how  and  where  crime  occurs  (Weisburd et al., 1993). There is a multitude of spatially and environmentally informed  theories about crime occurrence that identify certain physical dimensions, establishments  of interest, and visual characteristics of the environment as empirical predictors of crime  hot spots. Many of these theoretical perspectives have become the focal point for  resultant  crime  prevention  strategies  (Block  &  Block,  1995;  Eck  &  Guerette,  2012;  Weisburd, 2018), which are often executed on a situational basis at micro-level places  like crime hot spots (Clarke,  1995). Though, several questions persist regarding our  understanding of what make crime hot spots – the places that experience a statistically  disproportionate volume of crime (Eck et al., 2005) – ‘hot.’ Such questions are underscored  by the general acceptance of two assumptions. First, the assumption that crime hot spot  locations remain  static  over time, and second, the assumption that crime hot spot  environments are dynamic  over time. Holding to both these assumptions implies that  identified crime hot spots are likely to be both locationally static  and environmentally  dynamic.

# Introduction

One of the most significant evolutions in law enforcement strategy has been the identification  and prioritization of crime hot spots – or ‘Hot Spots Policing’ (Sherman & Weisburd, 1995).  Crime hot spots are often highly concentrated (Weisburd, 2015), small in scale (Weisburd et al.,   2012), and the byproduct of a multitude of co-located environmental risk factors (Kennedy  et al., 2011). The evidence on crime hot spots continues to develop rapidly and has yielded  consistently supportive results (Braga et al., 2019). For example, research indicates that hot  spots policing is widely used in law enforcement (Weisburd & Majmundar, 2018), is effective in  reducing crime (Braga et al., 2019) and can diffuse additional positive benefits into communities adjacent to hot spots policing target locations (Weisburd et al., 2006).

CONTACT Nathan T. Connealy  nconnealy@ut.edu  Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice, University of  Tampa, 401 W. Kennedy Blvd. Plant Hall 441, Tampa, FL, 33606, USA

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/1478601X.2025.2571483

© 2025 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 

This study simultaneously examines both assumptions related to the locations and  compositions of street robbery hot spots in Seattle, WA from 2012 to 2021. After identifying a sample of the ‘Top 10’ street robbery hot spots, control unit pairs were generated  using probability score matching. Hot spot and control units were then observationally  audited to account for the presence of crime generators and attractors, physical disorder,  and environmental decay through a remote systematic social observation of Google  Street View imagery for each available study year. Subsequent analyses will be guided  by two overarching research questions: (a) are the ‘Top 10’ street robbery hot spots  locationally static over time? And (b) are the ‘Top 10’ street robbery hot spots compositionally dynamic over time compared to control units? Better specifying the relationship  between crime hot spots, their environmental compositions, and time may help improve  place-based crime prevention programming, sustain potential crime reduction effects,  and reduce the likelihood of crime across a wider range of places.

The study of crime hot spots is grounded in several theories that attempt to examine and  explain the relationship between crime and place. A range of environmentally situated  theories have emerged that attempt to explain crime occurrence beyond the traditional  components pertaining to the victim and the offender. Routine activities theory (RAT)  (Cohen  & Felson,  1979)  first postulated  that  crime was  most  likely to  occur  when  a motivated offender crossed a suitable victim/target at a place absent capable guardianship. The notion that crime may be locationally informed and attributable to aspects of  the environment has since led to additional perspectives that focus on other place-based  considerations like the businesses, establishments, and visual characteristics present in  the area and their relationship to crime.

## Literature review

### Crime hot spots

Crime hot spots have made both the study and response to crime more feasible due to the  explicit prioritization of a much smaller number of criminogenic places. The Law of Crime  Concentration (LoCC) is a well-demonstrated phenomenon that indicates that most crime  events in a jurisdiction are attributable to only a select few micro-level places (Weisburd, 2015).  Research has found that around 5% of street segment units account for nearly 50% of all crime  events in a jurisdiction (Curman et al.,  2015). LoCC conclusions have been consistently  replicated in urban (Weisburd et al.,  2017), suburban (Gill et al.,  2017), and international  (Hardyns et al., 2019; Theron et al., 2023) contexts. With the spatial patterning of the crime  observed to be both highly localized (Connealy & Hart, 2024) and time-stable (Hart, 2021;  Schnell & McManus, 2022), law enforcement responses can be attenuated to more specific  places and problems. Therefore, the premise and success of hot spot policing hinges on  identifying the locations of crime hot spots and their underlying criminogenic causes.

### Environmental criminology

Crime pattern theory (CPT) (Brantingham & Brantingham, 1993, 2008) expanded the  scope of RAT by attempting to identify the type of places that may facilitate the intersection of motivated offenders and suitable targets in the proposed crime triangle. CPT  suggests criminogenic places may develop through the types of businesses and establishments that are proximate to crime opportunities and events. Explanations and correlational narratives on the potential connection between crime and place are ascertained  through classifying the businesses and establishments present at places into two distinct  tracts as crime generators or crime attractors (CGAs) (Brantingham & Brantingham, 1995).  Although not defined as inherently criminogenic, crime generators contribute to the risk  for crime by increasing the population in the immediate area for reasons related to the  usage, design, and functionality of places. Common crime generators include population-  centric places like shopping centers, transit hubs, or parks and schools (Andresen &  Kinney, 2012).

Crime attractors are distinguished by the known illicit and criminal opportunities  available at places due to the presence of the attractor. In the CPT literature, attractors  have been operationalized as vice markets for drugs or prostitution (Bernasco & Block,   2011; Demeau & Parent, 2018), high-volume cash-based businesses like pawnshops or  fringe banks (Kubrin & Hipp,  2016) and recreational marijuana dispensaries (Connealy  et al.,  2020). CGAs are widely analyzed in crime and place research and practice, and  a multitude of unique CGAs have demonstrated a relationship to crime occurrence even  when controlling for other macro- and neighborhood-level factors (McCord et al., 2007).  Furthermore, some CGA establishments are assumed to have a particularly constant and  realized risk for crime relative to other establishments. Such establishments are generally  profiled as ‘risky facilities’ (Eck et al., 2007).

The proposition of risky facilities is that crime tends to concentrate within homogenous  establishments and facility types (Eck et al., 2007). Thereby, the risk for crime can be better  interpreted when accounting for nearby facilities, especially those with an empirically  demonstrated relationship to crime. However, crime may not exclusively be driven by the  types of establishments present. The Iron Law of Troublesome Places contends that there  are often differential effects on crime when comparing across facilities of the same type  (Wilcox & Eck, 2011), such that only a small proportion of facilities account for the majority  of crime events associated with that facility type. Thus, the facility alone may not be  criminogenic, but the combination of other factors like the proximity or density to other  risky facilities (Grubesic et al., 2013), or the visual signals of environmental disorder and  decay co-occurring there (Connealy, 2023), may add to explanations of crime occurrence  at a given facility or crime hot spot.

Unlike CGA and risky facility data, which is often captured in official records at the  address-level in business license databases, the presence of environmental disorder and  decay is not administratively tracked or monitored. Owing to data constraints in measuring and testing environmental disorder, the focus of environmental disorder and crime  research has often been on how different visual cues solicit responses of risk and fear in  qualitative assessments (Hur & Nasar, 2014). Environmental disorder and decay characteristics are also more subjective, and research using citizen generated disorder measures  like 311 call lines has indicated that citizens often struggle to distinguish between  disorder and crime (Gau & Pratt, 2008; Hipp, 2010). Despite these limitations, empirical  examinations have uncovered a positive association between environmental disorder and  crime (Skogan & Steiner, 2004). Research on micro-level crime hot spots has established  that crime hot spots may be conditioned by the presence of environmental disorder and  decay (EDD) (Telep & Hibdon, 2019; Weisburd & Mazerolle, 2000). Thus, it is pertinent to  assess both CGAs and EDD when studying the composition of crime hot spots. Evaluating  the relationship between crime and place more comprehensively requires modern techniques like remote systematic social observation (SSO) using Google Street View (GSV).

Another limitation in prior research on CGAs and EDD is that most studies use cross-  sectional environmental data to examine longitudinal crime trends. However, this is  problematic, as CGAs, risky facilities, and EDD features may not endure in environments  over time. This limitation is largely an artifact of data challenges, as business license data  and resultant verifications and disorder data are challenging to administratively collect at  scale. A promising solution to this is leveraging GSV imagery, which contains multi-image  archives of specific places, to evaluate the features present in environments over time.

### Remote systematic social observation

Remote SSO involves the qualitative, visual assessment of the presence and/or qualities of  pre-defined aspects of interest. SSO provides a replicable, reliable, and credible way to  study micro-level hot spots environments (Vandeviver, 2014), and new applications like  Google Street View have further facilitated the ability to execute remote SSO in the social  sciences. The methodology has been previously used to examine drug markets (Hsu &  Miller, 2017; Sytsma et al., 2021), crime location selection (Langton & Steenbeek, 2017),  and built environments (He et al., 2017) in relevant criminal justice research. Prior research  using remote SSO techniques has also developed standardized indices for recording EDD  at the micro-level (Odgers et al., 2012), and the functionality, quality, and archives of GSV  imagery allows for a multitude of environmental features to be both observed and  recorded. The development of remote SSO has coincided with the emergence of research  on micro-level environments, including the study of hot spots and EDD (Connealy, 2023).  As technological capacities have also increased with applications like GSV, research can  broach the examination of environments over time. Remote SSO through platforms like  GSV can improve crime and place research by enabling more longitudinal data collection  and analysis and more clearly operationalizing measures of interest, thereby increasing  both reliability and validity.

The relationship between crime and place has become increasingly well established  (Weisburd et al.,  2024), and the focus on using crime hot spots to understand crime  patterns and effectuate crime reductions has proven effective (Braga & Weisburd, 2020).  The evidence base for crime hot spots and their importance to rectifying crime problems  is robust, and there is a wealth of research identifying the environmental features present  in and correlated with crime hot spots (Connealy,  2021). However, the field largely  adheres to two assumptions about crime hot spots that may foundationally impact our  understanding of their formation, persistence, and composition. The first assumption is  that crime hot spot locations are static and remain the same over time, while the second  assumption posits that crime hot spot environmental compositions are  dynamic  and  observably evolve over time. These assumptions have the potential to either co-exist or  contradict, but their routinely hypothesized mutual occurrence (static  hot spots with  dynamic compositions) has yet to be empirically tested and verified. Alternative patterns  are also plausible – for instance, hot spots may shift spatially over time or exhibit stable  environmental features despite fluctuations in crime. Such variations would challenge the  prevailing assumptions and suggest that crime concentrations are shaped by more  complex spatial-temporal and environmental factors. Clarifying which of these patterns  is most common, and under what conditions, is essential for accurately theorizing and  responding to crime hot spots.

### The gap

To test these propositions, the study will determine if the sample of identified ‘Top 10’  street robbery hot spots were locationally  static  or  dynamic  over time, what features  significantly distinguish crime hot spots compared to controls, and which crime hot spot  environmental features are static or dynamic over time. The current study is positioned to  answer several questions regarding the locational stability and environmental composition of crime hot spots.

After identifying which features are more observably present in hot spot and control  units following the remote systematic social observation, the study will examine the  aggregate stability of hot spot environments by testing the number of recorded changes  from year-to-year relative to controls. Analyses will also inform upon the individual  environmental predictors that are significantly more dynamic (more frequently emerging  and/or disappearing) or static (consecutive re-occurrence) in street robbery hot spots  compared to controls. Crime and place research often collects environmental predictor  data cross-sectionally (i.e. business licenses for a given year or environmental audits at  a single point in time) but then operationalizes the measures longitudinally. Such  approaches may not account for important year-to-year shifts and may possess underlying issues of reliability. This analysis will add clarity to our understanding of how  environmental predictors profile in micro-level crime hot spots over time and how certain  variables should be operationalized when using time-sensitive methodologies.

## The current study

The study will first identify a sample of the most criminogenic street robbery hot spots  across the entirety of the study period. This cumulative hot spot sample will be based on  the total street robbery count and will be leveraged to identify if the ‘Top 10’ most  criminogenic units in Seattle recorded statically high levels of street robbery in each  study year sequenced or if they fluctuated across years (for example, one particularly  salient crime year that resulted in their identification in the cumulative sample). Analyses  will first examine the stability of the sample hot spots in the aggregate, identifying key  descriptive statistics like the average number of sampled hot spots that met the criteria  for being a ‘Top 10’ hot spot in an individual year. Then, individual hot spot stability  trajectories will be sequenced in a matrix to account for the number of individual years  the sample hot spot met the ‘Top 10’ criteria and the number of times the hot spot was  hot/not across consecutive yearly intervals. This approach will allow for the first assumption to be tested, which holds that hot spots locations tend to remain static over time.

Through a case-control research design that pairs each identified hot with a set of  empirically  matched  control  units,  the  study  will  attempt  to  answer  a  set  of  four  interrelated research questions listed below. Each question is compatible with one of  the two widely held field assumptions regarding crime hot spot locations and compositions. The first two test the premise that crime hot spot locations may be static, while  the second two test the assumption that crime hot spot environmental compositions  may be  dynamic.

- (1) Are the aggregate street robbery hot spots more static or dynamic over time?
- (2) Are the individual street robbery hot spot trajectories more static or dynamic?
- (3) Are the aggregate compositions of street robbery hot spots more static or dynamic?
- (4) Are individual environmental features more static or dynamic in street robbery hot  spots?


## Methodology

### Study setting

The study focuses on a sample of identified street robbery hot spots in Seattle, WA. With  a city population of around 750,000 people (the greater Seattle area is closer to 4 million),  Seattle is the 15th most populous city in the US. The population also grew over 20% from  2010 to 2020 according to recent Census estimates, making it one of the fastest growing  major cities. Seattle has simultaneously experienced rising violent crime levels and  shortages in police personnel, with evidence of even further exacerbated effects following  the George Floyd killing and protests in 2020 (Piza & Connealy, 2022). Seattle provides an  ideal backdrop to prioritize the understanding of crime hot spots, which may help to  inform crime prevention efforts and the allocation of scarce law enforcement resources  towards beneficial crime reductions.

The crime data used in the study was gleaned from the Seattle Open Data Portal.1  The  data portal includes multiple years of geocoded crime data with crime type (and subtype)  delineations. The crime data included pre-existing XY coordinates, and the downloaded  files were amenable to a geographic information system (GIS). For the purposes of the  study, the crime data were filtered to identify all street robbery incidents occurring over  a ten-year period from 2012 to 2021. Street robbery was selected as the crime of interest  for several reasons. First, street robbery is environmentally informed (Rasmusson &  Helbich, 2020), as prior research has indicated that the settings and environments that  predict different types of crime regularly vary across crime-specific subtypes (Connealy &  Piza, 2019). Second, street robbery is often emphasized as a crime of interest in public  discourse and police interventions due to perceptions and fears associated with violent  crime and the express nature of ‘robbery’ as a crime type (Gale & Coupe, 2005). Third, as an  outdoor crime, street robbery aligns with the study’s audit of environmental predictors  and their relationship to crime occurrence. The filtered street robbery incident data were  spatially joined to individual street segments in Seattle based on their date of occurrence  using ArcGIS Pro.

### Data sources and unit of analysis

Individual street segments, which represent both sides of a street between two  intersections, were utilized as the unit of analysis. In addition to being commonly used  in micro-level crime and place research (Weisburd et al.,  2012), street segments have  utility in the present study because they provide fixed unit boundaries for the remote SSO  coding effort. The areas associated with each hot spot and control unit have real, physical,  delineable boundary lines that can be more easily accounted for while coding. This  improves the reliability and validity of the coding process relative to more abstract micro-  level units sometimes used in crime and place research like Thiessen polygons or hexagonal grids (Rickson et al., 2023). Street segments have also been found to represent an  appropriate spatial scale for capturing social activities (Braga et al., 2010) without being  plagued  by  ecological  issues  like  the  modifiable  areal  unit  problem  (MAUP)  (Fotheringham & Wong, 1991). Seattle has 23,805 individual street segments within city  limits and an average segment length of approximately 422 feet.

### Hot spot identification

Street robbery hot spots were identified based on several criteria. First, all street robbery  events from 2012 to 2021 were summated to create a total street robbery count at street  segments. Using the total aggregated count prioritizes the quantity of events over time,  as opposed to considering other common hot spot identification strategies that prioritize  rates, densities, or disaggregated time periods. Second, the total aggregated count across  the study period was used as opposed to identifying hot spots in each year because the  purpose of the study intends to track changes in the most criminogenic places over time  as a metric of stability. Although it may seem intuitive to require a selected hot spot to be  a ‘hot spot’ in successive years, one of the central aims of the study is to test this  assumption. Third, using the total count ensures that the most criminogenic street  robbery units are identified as hot spots.2  Focusing on the most cumulatively criminogenic units also best positions the study to test for static or dynamic environmental  composition over time. The study identified just the ‘Top 10’ most criminogenic places  based on total street robbery count as hot spots, which aligns with a meaningful hot spot  aggregation threshold observed in prior research (Connealy & Hart, 2023). Further, the  coding of 10 hot spot units in up to ten different observation years (as well as two types of  control units) maintains coding feasibility and increases the sample power through the  longitudinal design.

Identified  hot  spots  were  matched  to  empirical  controls  using  a  case-control  research  design  that  paired  each  hot  spot  unit  (case)  to  an  empirically  derived  control  unit  based  on  the  background  risk  score  of  a  unit  being  a  hot  spot  (Connealy,  2023).  Instead  of  matching  the  street  segment  units  synthetically  or  in  a  coarsened  approach,  the  remote  SSO  coding  requires  that  each  control  be  a singular, existing, physically bound unit selected without replacement. Relatedly,  the  study  approach  could  not  match  units  using  common  criminogenic  qualities  like the presence of CGAs or EDD, because the study intends to test for potential  differences  in  those  risk  factors  between  hot  spot  and  control  units.  The  study  instead  operationalized  several  covariates  that  generate  a  background  risk  of  a  unit  being  a  hot  spot,  including  street  segment  qualities  like  the  road  type  (arterial  or  local)  and  surrounding  demographics  (units  were  matched  within  the  same  neighborhood).  This  approach  facilitates  a  more  equivalent  comparison  of  hot  spot  and  control  units  by  controlling  for  background  risk,  while  allowing  for  more theoretically relevant variables of interest like CGA and EDD presence to be  analyzed.3

## Probability score matching

The  probability  score  of  a  unit  being  a  hot  spot  was  based  on  the  covariates  sequenced  in  the  model  and  the  derived  value  was  used  to  match  cases  and  controls  on  a  one-to-one  basis  via  the  R  package  ‘MatchIt’  (Ho  et  al.,  2011).  The  matching  process  was  executed  two  different  times  to  assign  the  selected  hot  spots to two types of control units. The first group of controls involved segments  that  did  not  experience  any  street  robberies  during  the  study  period,  while  the  second  pool  of  controls  were  those  that  experienced  street  robbery  but  were  not  classified  as  hot  spots.  The  matching  variables  and  results  are  listed  in  Table  1.4  The  results  of  the  matching  indicate  a  high  degree  of  effectivity  and  balance, with each case being paired to a singular zero robbery and low robbery  control unit without replication. The final sample resulted in the 10 identified hot  spot units matched to 10 ‘zero’ street robbery controls that experienced no street  robbery  during  the  study  period  and  10  ‘low’  robbery  controls  that  experienced  less  street  robberies  than  the  hot  spot  delineation  threshold.  Matching  results  were  checked  using  a  series  of  balance  tests  like  standardized  mean  differences  and variance ratios to ensure paired hot spots and controls had similar values for  each matching variable sequenced. Each unit had the potential of being coded up  to  ten  times  for  every  year  in  the  study  period  based  on  available  GSV  imagery  (maximum of 300 street segment observations if all study years are included across  both the hot spot and control units identified).

The remote SSO was undertaken by the authors to code for the presence of each  individual  environmental  feature  on  hot  spot  and  control  units  in  a  blinded  procedure.  After  matching,  the  unit  status  as  a  hot  spot  or  control  was  blinded  to  the  authors  to  reduce  potential  coding  bias.  Each  unit  was  coded  for  every  available GSV image year archived from 2012 to 2021.5  When study years were not  available, the transition from one available timepoint in the data to the next was  Table 1. Hot spot and control matching results. Unit Control Pool Matched Match Rate Zero Crime Control 19563 10 10/10 (100%) Low Crime Control 4243 10 10/10 (100%) compared  without  accounting  for  missingness.  All  the  individual  CGA  and  EDD  indicators were dichotomously captured as present or absent on a given segment  during the year of interest to streamline and simplify the coding effort.6  Individual  units were manually coded by scrolling, zooming, and panning the length of the  street  segment  for  each  archived  year  of  the  study  period  available  at  the  unit-  level by the authorship team. The authors ensured reliability across coded records  by  executing  a  pilot  code  and  doing  an  overlapping  code  on  10%  of  units  to  compare records and ensure reliability across measures. The features coded for are  included  in  Table  2  below,  with  composite  thematic  categories  that  they  were  derived from in the wider crime and place literature indicated in bold. Collapsing  individual  predictors  into  thematic  constructs  has  been  previously  utilized  in  the  literature  when  necessary  to  achieve  adequate  sample  power  (Bowers,  2014;  Connealy,  2023)  and  this  approach  to  feature  organization  is  used  later  in  the  present study for the environmental predictor analyses.

## Remote SSO with GSV

The first research question tests if the identified hot spots were static or dynamic  in  the  aggregate  when  analyzed  across  yearly  intervals.  A  similar  approach  was  used  to  identify the ‘Top  10’  most criminogenic  hot spots  in  each study  year by  focusing  on  the  total  street  robbery  count.  This  ensures  that  the  most  criminogenic units, at the same threshold of the main sample’s ‘Top 10’, are selected for  each study year. The results will then indicate the number of hot spots in the main  ‘Top 10’ sample that met the criteria across each study year sequenced from 2012  to  2021.  Results  will  examine  the  share  of  the  sampled  ‘Top  10’  crime  hot  spots  that met the criteria of being a hot spot in each individual study year predicated  on  the  same  ‘Top  10’  approach.  Then,  the  sample  of  ‘Top  10’  hot  spot  will  be  modeled  across  time  to  examine  the  potential  for  consecutive  stability  across  Table 2. Individual environmental predictors and composite feature aggregations. Composite Construct Physical Disorder Garbage/litter Graffiti Vandalized sign Broken  window Broken fence Abandoned  car Decay Sidewalk   deterioration Street   deterioration Lawn/garden   deterioration Unused  spaces Building   dilapidation Abandoned  building Alcohol/Drug Bar Nightclub Liquor Store Smoke  shops Dispensaries Dwellings Hotel Motel Apartments Transit Bus Stop Tram Station Entertainment and  Generators Parks Points of  interest Theatres Schools Shopping Grocery store Dollar store Large retailer Money Issuing Bank Credit union Check cashing Outdoor  ATM Single Service Tattoo Laundromat Barbershop/  Salon Food Fast-food Restaurant Coffee and  pastry Variety Store Cornerstones Pharmacies Pawnshops Vehicle-related Gas station Parking garage Parking lot Construction yearly  intervals.  The  results  produced  will  indicate  if  the  general  stability  of  the  identified total-based ‘Top 10’ hot spots is more static or dynamic in the aggregate  through  the  average  number  of  hot  spots  that  achieve  yearly  ‘Top  10’  hot  spot  status.

### Analytical approach

The second research question is concerned with the different trajectories each individual hot spot in the main ‘Top 10’ sample may display. This analysis uses a matrix to  sequence out year-to-year hot spot status to show if the main sample of ‘Top 10’ hot spots  depicts patterns of static stability or dynamic fluctuations. It may be such that a hot spot is  not hot in many years, but has high crime counts in a single year that enable it to ascribe  its status as a ‘Top 10’ cumulative hot spot. Or a hot spot may be a hot spot in all years,  many years, consecutive years, or hot and cold and emergent at multiple different time  points. The individual trajectory analysis will help uncover more nuanced patterns of hot  spot formation and persistence.

The third research question tests the aggregate composition of hot spot environments  over time. The analysis is designed to measure the total, average, and median number of  fluctuations that occur in hot spots compared to control unit environments. Each unit  type is longitudinally formatted as a panel, and the environmental composition at time  one is compared to each subsequent available time point (there are gaps across GSV  observations and some missing yearly environmental data) to measure changes that  occur in the environment across each recorded instance of time coded using the GSV  imagery. The data are positioned to indicate the number of changes that occur from one  time point to the next, though, in the compositional analysis, specific feature changes are  not delineated. The analysis simply seeks to measure how frequent measurable changes,  across any of the tested environmental predictors, tend to occur as an indicator of  compositional stability or dynamicity. An ANOVA can then be used to measure changes  in the average fluctuation rate of hot spot units compared to zero crime control and low  crime control units, followed by local pairwise comparisons as applicable.

The fourth research question aims to add more nuance to our understanding of hot  spots by testing each individual environmental predictor type as static or dynamic. Each  of the 46 unique environmental predictor features coded for were assessed within hot  spot and control unit longitudinal panels to identify observed fluctuations over time. The  data records every change in feature status type as being present or absent for every time  point coded on a unit-by-unit basis. Differences in feature types were compared between  hot spots, zero crime control, and low crime control units using Fisher’s exact tests, which  are best equipped to handle low sample and cell sizes, test for significance, and provide  simple interpretational outputs. The results are positioned to indicate if certain features  are more present, and potentially more static or dynamic, in hot spots compared to the  control units operationalized.

The results indicate that the identified sample of the most criminogenic ‘Top 10’ street robbery  hot spots were locationally stable. The main sample hot spots met the criteria for being a ‘Top  10’ hot spot in an individual year on an average of 6.4 times out of the potential 10 years in the  study period (i.e. 6.4./10 hot spots met the criteria each year on average). The standard  deviation was also relatively low (1.71), suggesting that most hot spots were around the  average value and consistently met the yearly threshold of being a ‘Top 10’ street robbery hot  spot. Table 3 shows the number of hot spots in the main sample that met the criteria of being  a ‘Top 10’ hot spot in each individual study year, with a minimum of only three hot spots in  2020 which may be linked to Covid-19 timing, and a maximum of nine meeting the criteria in  2018.

# Results

## Crime hot spot locational stability

### Research question 1: aggregate hot spot locational stability

Table 3. Hot spot stability descriptive statistics.

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 6 6 6 7 6 8 9 8 3 5 Mean SD Minimum Maximum 6.40 1.71 3 (2020) 9 (2018)

### Research question 2: individual hot spot locational stability trajectories

In addition to looking at the locationally stability of the most criminogenic ‘Top 10’ street  robbery hot spots in the aggregate, the results also examined the individual stability of each  hot spot. Table 4 depicts hot spot stability through a matrix sequenced in rows and columns,  with each row reflecting the stability trajectory of a single hot spot and the columns depicting  each study year. Zero values in a cell reflect instances where the hot spot was not a yearly ‘Top  10’ hot spot, these cells were always visualized in ‘white’ to reflect non-hot spots in a year.  Values of one in ‘light gray’ colored cells indicate emergent hot spots, where a hot spot first  appears in a potential stability trajectory in that year. Finally, values of one in ‘dark gray’ colored  cells reflect stable hot spots, which required the row to be a hot spot in the prior year and then  again in the given year. Interestingly, despite the aggregate stability evidenced in the first  research question, the individual hot spot trajectories are more variant. Hot spots in rows 1–5  were only hot spots in five or less individual years. For example, the hot spot in row one was  only a hot spot in two individual years – despite being identified as a ‘Top 10’ most  criminogenic street robbery hot spot in the main sample. Alternatively, both hot spots  depicted in rows 9–10 met the hot spot criteria in every individual year. Though, the observed  pattern seems to suggest that once a hot spot became a hot spot in 1 year it tended to have  staying power into the next year. There were only 11 total instances where a hot spot was not  stable into the next yearly interval, whereas there were 49 recorded instances of repeat  stability. Figure 1:

Table 4. Individual hot spot stability trajectories.

| |
|---|


## Crime hot spot environmental composition

### Environmental predictor presence

Assessing the stability of environmental features in hot spots first required determining  the relative presence of each feature in hot spots compared to controls. Some preliminary  patterns emerged across individual environmental features, composite types, and their  observable presence in hot spots. For example, a multitude of individual environmental  features (20/46 tested) recorded higher presence percentages than either type of control  unit. These features may uniquely distinguish hot spots in that their presence, relative to  their absence, is observably higher in hot spots compared to places that experience no  crime (zero crime controls) and crime at lower levels (low crime controls). Some features  had particularly salient discrepancies in their presence percentage relative to controls, like  vape/smoke shops, fast food, banks, grocers, large retails stores, bus and tram stops, and  pharmacies and cornerstones. These features also highlighted a few composite typologies  that generally profile as more observably present in hot spots, including decay, money  issuing establishments, and transit. Criminogenic environmental features have been  identified and compared relative to controls in prior literature, though, the next analyses  are well positioned to add new and important insight regarding how such features may  profile over time in hot spots. Table 5 shows the percentages of individual environmental  features present across both hot spots and controls.

### Research question 3: aggregate stability of hot spot environmental compositions

Research question three tests the aggregate environmental compositions of hot spots  by  measuring  the  recorded  level  of  change  across  each  time  interval  relative  to  controls.  The  approach uses  ANOVA to test for group  differences  in average  active  features, while also assessing the average level of change in active features from time-  to-time. The results indicate that there are not significant differences in active feature  levels or average change rates in active features, though, the results were approaching  significance (p = .089). The values do suggest that hot spots have the highest number  of  average  active  features  (8.42),  the  highest  standard  deviation  around  the  mean  value (7.73), and the highest level of average change from year-to-year (1.56 feature  shift  on  average).  Additionally,  because  of  the  marginally  significant  ANOVA  result,  pairwise analyses were examined to see if a group difference emerged in a bivariate  analysis. The pairwise results indicated that hot spot environments did change more  dynamically  than  zero  crime  control  environments.  Thus,  there  may  be  something  markedly unique about ‘crime’ environments and their dynamic rate of change relative  to places that do not experience crime. Table 6 includes the results of the global and  local comparisons.

To further explore the potential stability in hot spot compositions, each individual feature  was assessed over time in both the hot spots and controls. Status changes (presence/  absence from year-to-year) were tracked for each of the 46 individual environmental  features coded for and the magnitude and significance of observed fluctuations was  quantified across unit types. The results are included in Table 7 and generally indicate that  hot spots show more environmental change than either control type. Several features  showed significant differences in fluctuation with each being more dynamic in hot spots  than the control units, including construction (p = 0.002), graffiti/painted over (p = 0.024),  and broken windows (p = 0.020). Several other features were observably more dynamic in  hot spots including unused physical spaces, gas stations, sidewalk deterioration, garbage  and little, but these fluctuations were not significant in the analysis.7 Conversely, several  feature types were static across all unit types and reflected little variability. Liquor stores  were more static in hot spots, while several institutional features like schools, theatres,  Table 5. Environmental feature presence in hot spot and control units. Top 10 HS Zero Crime  Controls Low Crime  Controls Feature Construct Present %   (n = 62) Present %   (n = 44) Present %   (n = 60) Bars Alcohol/Drugs 6 9.68% 13 29.55% 45 75.00% Nightclubs Alcohol/Drugs 6 9.68% 0 0.00% 3 5.00% Dispensaries Alcohol/Drugs 0 0.00% 0 0.00% 3 5.00% Liquor Stores Alcohol/Drugs 6 9.68% 13 29.55% 41 68.33% Vape/Smoke Shops Alcohol/Drugs 18 29.03% 0 0.00% 4 6.67% Abandoned Buildings Decay 10 16.13% 3 6.82% 7 11.67% Building Dilapidation Decay 14 22.58% 3 6.82% 8 13.33% Lawn/Vegetation Deterioration Decay 27 43.55% 25 56.82% 18 30.00% Street Deterioration Decay 6 9.68% 20 45.45% 12 20.00% Sidewalk Deterioration Decay 15 24.19% 6 13.64% 2 3.33% Unused Spaces Decay 16 25.81% 12 27.27% 14 23.33% Apartments Dwellings 25 40.32% 23 52.27% 36 60.00% Hotel Dwellings 13 20.97% 12 27.27% 30 50.00% Motels Dwellings 0 0.00% 0 0.00% 0 0.00% Parks Entertainment/Generators 12 19.35% 0 0.00% 12 20.00% Points of Interest Entertainment/Generators 33 53.23% 15 34.09% 36 60.00% Schools Entertainment/Generators 0 0.00% 7 15.91% 0 0.00% Theatres Entertainment/Generators 0 0.00% 6 13.64% 17 28.33% Coffee/Bakery Food 44 70.97% 19 43.18% 32 53.33% Fast Food Food 51 82.26% 6 13.64% 32 53.33% Restaurants Food 61 98.39% 22 50.00% 51 85.00% Banks Money Issuing 44 70.97% 0 0.00% 23 38.33% Check Cashing Money Issuing 6 9.68% 3 6.82% 6 10.00% Credit Union Money Issuing 0 0.00% 0 0.00% 4 6.67% Outdoor ATM Money Issuing 12 19.35% 0 0.00% 7 11.67% Abandoned Cars Physical Disorder 7 11.29% 10 22.73% 0 0.00% Broken Fences Physical Disorder 20 32.26% 15 34.09% 22 36.67% Broken Windows Physical Disorder 22 35.48% 20 45.45% 8 13.33% Garbage/Litter Physical Disorder 30 48.39% 18 40.91% 9 15.00% Graffiti/Painted Over Physical Disorder 36 58.06% 29 65.91% 26 43.33% Vandalized/Broken Signage Physical Disorder 22 35.48% 16 36.36% 16 26.67% Dollar Stores Shopping 6 9.68% 0 0.00% 0 0.00% Grocers Shopping 43 69.35% 0 0.00% 6 10.00% Large Retail Shopping 50 80.65% 8 18.18% 16 26.67% Barbershops/Salons Single Service 19 30.65% 0 0.00% 16 26.67% Laundromat Single Service 0 0.00% 0 0.00% 0 0.00% Tattoos Single Service 0 0.00% 0 0.00% 0 0.00% Bus Stops Transit 48 77.42% 0 0.00% 19 31.67% Tram Stops Transit 24 38.71% 7 15.91% 6 10.00% Pawnshops Variety Store 0 0.00% 0 0.00% 2 3.33% Pharmacies Variety Store 23 37.10% 5 11.36% 7 11.67% Cornerstones Variety Store 17 27.42% 0 0.00% 0 0.00% Construction Vehicle-Related 21 33.87% 8 18.18% 16 26.67% Gas Stations Vehicle-Related 11 17.74% 0 0.00% 7 11.67% Parking Garage Vehicle-Related 12 19.35% 15 34.09% 26 43.33% Parking Lots Vehicle-Related 29 46.77% 23 52.27% 25 41.67% and other points of interest and entertainment remained static across all unit types and  did not record any year-to-year fluctuations. These findings suggest that hot spot environments, in addition to being more criminogenic, may also be more disorderly and  dynamic – with more frequent fluctuations observed in the aggregate and across several  individual features. Though, many environmental features are static regardless of unit  conceptualization.

### Research question 4: individual environmental feature stability in hot spots

Research question two was uniquely positioned to examine the individual trajectories  of the identified ‘Top 10’ hot spots. The individual trajectories revealed a bit more nuance  in the stability of hot spots than the aggregate analysis. For example, 4/10 hot spots met  the yearly ‘Top 10’ criteria in less than half of the study years. One hot spot, identified  previously in Table 7 as hot spot one, only met the yearly hot spot criteria in two (non-  Table 6. ANOVA for aggregate stability of hot spot environmental compositions. Group Avg | Median Number  of Active Features SD of Active  Features Avg. Change in  Active Features Avg. % Change in  Active Features ANOVA  p Hot Spot 8.42 | 10.0 7.73 1.56 30.26% Zero Crime Controls 3.77 | 0.0 4.74 0.77 53.3% 0.0898 Low Crime Controls 6.63 | 7.0 5.9 1.04 33.81% Group t p Hot Spot vs. Zero Crime  Controls 2.06 0.043 Hot Spot vs. Low Crime  Controls 0.37 0.714 Zero Crime Controls vs.  Low Crime Controls −1.71 0.0921 consecutive) years. Alternatively, two hot spots met the criteria in every year. Across the  trajectories, hot spots tended to remain hot from year-to-year after reaching the criteria  and generally reflected a high locational stability. The results generally confirm the field’s  assumption that hot spot locations are largely static.

# Discussion and conclusion

The present study tested two widely held assumptions in crime and place research  surrounding hot spots, namely that (1) crime hot spot locations are temporally  static,  and that (2) crime hot spot compositions are  dynamic. The field largely treats these  explanations of hot spots as simultaneously co-occurring, but research has yet to formally  test their mutual existence empirically. The current study analyzed a series of interrelated  research questions focusing on crime hot spot locational stability and environmental  compositions in the aggregate and individually. The results of each research question are  summarized below, with a discussion of the proposed implications and directions for  future research.

Research question one indicated that aggregate hot spot locational stability for the  ‘Top 10’ sample was largely stable. On average, 6.4 of the study’s ‘Top 10’ sample met the  criteria for being a hot spot in a given year – even rising to 9/10 in 1 year. The standard  deviation (1.71) also indicated that in most individual years, the number of hot spots  meeting the criteria was around the identified mean value of 6.4 (there were only two  individual years with less than six hot spots). Such evidence indicates that the most  criminogenic hot spots may be more time stable, or static, in the aggregate over time,  thereby providing additional empirical support for the law of crime concentration at just  a select few crime hot spots (Weisburd, 2015).

The third research question was concerned with the aggregate environmental composition of hot spots relative to controls. This question was positioned to identify both the  presence and rate of change of environmental features in hot spots. The results identified  that hot spots had the highest number of mean/median active features, the highest  standard deviations in feature presence, and the highest average change in features  Table 7. Fisher’s exact test for individual environmental feature stability in hot spots. Observed Year-to-Year Changes Feature HS ZCC LCC Classification p Construction 12 3 7 More Dynamic in Hot Spots 0.0017* Broken Windows 4 1 0 More Dynamic in Hot Spots 0.0202* Graffiti/Painted Over 7 2 6 More Dynamic in Hot Spots 0.0239* Parking Garage 0 0 2 Mixed 0.0764^ Vandalized Signage 4 1 4 Mixed 0.0821^ Unused Spaces 2 1 0 More Dynamic in Hot Spots 0.2231 Gas Stations 1 0 0 More Dynamic in Hot Spots 0.3012 Sidewalk Deterioration 1 0 0 More Dynamic in Hot Spots 0.3012 Outdoor ATM 0 0 1 Mixed 0.3012 Pawnshops 0 0 1 Mixed 0.3012 Lawn/Garden Deterioration 0 0 1 Mixed 0.3012 Vape/Smoke Shops 0 0 1 Mixed 0.3012 Nightclubs 0 0 1 Mixed 0.3012 Dispensaries 0 0 1 Mixed 0.3012 Coffee Shops/Bakeries 0 1 0 Mixed 0.3012 Restaurants 0 1 0 Mixed 0.3012 Large Retail 0 1 0 Mixed 0.3012 Fast Food 0 1 0 Mixed 0.3012 Building Dilapidation 0 1 0 Mixed 0.3012 Bars 0 1 0 Mixed 0.3012 Apartments 0 1 0 Mixed 0.3012 Garbage/Litter 4 2 2 More Dynamic in Hot Spots 0.3425 Grocery Stores 1 0 1 Mixed 0.4724 Parking Lots 1 1 0 Mixed 0.4724 Points of Interest 1 1 0 Mixed 0.4724 Abandoned Buildings 1 1 0 Mixed 0.4724 Liquor Stores 0 1 1 More Static in Hot Spots 0.4724 Broken Fences 1 1 2 Mixed 0.6376 Parks 0 0 0 Mixed – Schools 0 0 0 Mixed – Street Deterioration 0 0 0 Mixed – Tattoo Parlors 0 0 0 Mixed – Theatres 0 0 0 Mixed – Tram Stations 0 0 0 Mixed – Variety Stores 0 0 0 Mixed – Motels 0 0 0 Mixed – Credit Unions 0 0 0 Mixed – Banks 0 0 0 Mixed – Barbershops 0 0 0 Mixed – Bus Stations 0 0 0 Mixed – Check Cashing 0 0 0 Mixed – Hotels 0 0 0 Mixed – Dollar Stores 0 0 0 Mixed – Abandoned Cars 0 0 0 Mixed – Laundromats 0 0 0 Mixed – no environmental fluctuations were observed in the features without noted p-values. recorded year-to-year. In addition to elevated feature presence, the results showed that  hot spot environments are more frequently changing and dynamic in the aggregate than  control unit environments. Though, the ANOVA test of mean differences did not indicate  significant differences, the pairwise comparisons did reveal that hot spot environments  were significantly more dynamic than zero crime control environments (places without  any street robberies). Low crime control units were also approaching significance relative  to zero crime control units, but hot spot and low crime control units were not significantly  different. This may suggest that criminogenic environments (hot spots and low crime  units) are more dynamic than places without crime in total feature presence and turnover.  The results generally align with support for the second assumption that crime hot spots  tend to be more compositionally dynamic in the aggregate. Prior research has similarly  noted that hot spots are not only characterized by more disorder and crime but also have  more pro-social and general activities (Weisburd et al., 2025). The observed finding may  underscore that hot spot environments are simply more active, in general, than other  unit-type settings.

The last research question sequenced the fluctuation of each individual environmental  feature through observed year-to-year changes in presence or absence. Several individual  environmental features had previously emerged as more present in hot spots in their  relative percentage share, but their effect on crime hot spot formation and potential  stability may be better understood via their relationship with time. The results revealed  that construction, broken windows, and graffiti/painted over were significantly more  dynamic in hot spots. Despite the low sample and cell size for unit-level panel variation,  the general pattern of features suggested that several features tended to be more  dynamic in hot spots, at least relative to the control types. The findings offer some  support for the assumption that hot spot environmental compositions may be impacted  by more dynamicity across individual features. However, many individual features were  highly static in hot spots (as well as the controls). Hot spots may be characterized by  a larger aggregate turnover, in that more features are present in hot spots and more  features are changing, but many features – and perhaps those most affecting hot spots –  remain highly static.

Collectively, the findings offer general support for both assumptions, with some  caveats. Hot spot locations tend to be stable in the aggregate and across individual  trajectories. The results of the first two research questions highlighted that the ‘Top 10’  most criminogenic street robbery hot spots were often hot spots in individual study years,  and that when sequenced out in their trajectory they reflected stability after emerging as  a hot spot. Similarly, the environmental composition analysis found that a multitude of  commonly operationalized individual environmental features were more present in hot  spots, that aggregate hot spot compositions tended to be more dynamic (and were  significantly more dynamic compared to zero crime controls), and certain individual  features were significantly more dynamic in hot spots. That said, the results also pointed  towards the need to evaluate hot spots on a case-specific base to better understand hot  spot locations and compositions for the purposes of crime prevention.

The approach and results of the study offer several important insights to the study of  hot spots, environments, and crime and place more generally. First, the study was the first  to begin exploring the intersection of two widely held field assumptions surrounding hot  spot  locational  stability  and  environmental  compositions.  These  assumptions  are  generally objective in the literature, but little empirical support explicitly underlies such  contentions. It is important to continually test such positions, especially with new criminogenic features constantly emerging and increased access to innovative techniques to  study highly micro-levels for crime and place concepts. This study found support for both  assumptions, though, with varying degrees of nuance. Some hot spots, for example, were  not as locational stable, or had more variant trajectories, and certain field supported  criminogenic  environmental  features  were  not  more  present  or  accordingly  more  dynamic or static in hot spots. The field should continue to press into formative assumptions that have meaningfully shaped the study of crime and place and should leverage  new and innovative methods to do so.

Second, the study took a modern open-access data source, Google Street View, and  utilized the archival imagery available to conduct a longitudinal study of places. Most  environmental studies, especially those focused on crime generators and attractors that  center  on  business  data  and  licensure,  tend  to  operationalize  key  variables  cross-  sectionally even when running longitudinal analyses. Thus, crime and place studies  have identified a litany of features that are correlated to crime, but their potential causal  effects and their relationship to crime through time (as either being impactful due to their  static permanency or dynamic transiency) has been lesser explored. The present study  was able to use Google Street View imagery in a novel way to account for how some  features may behave in hot spots over time by recording their observable presence and  fluctuation relative to controls.

Third, the study found preliminary support for hot spot locational stability and environmental composition dynamicity (particularly in the aggregate). There is something  unique about the criminogenic nature of the identified ‘Top 10’ hot spot sample in that  these units were extremely high in street robbery levels, generally locationally static over  time, subject to a lot of environmental dynamicity or change, and discernibly different  from controls in myriad ways pertaining to individual feature presence and dynamicity.  The field has come a long way in our knowledge of hot spots, and the potential benefits of  allocating available public safety resources towards such places. However, the results also  insinuate that there is still much to learn, and that lower n studies may provide inherent  value in recognizing the situational nuance of each hot spot. The results of the present  study are also correlational and cannot draw specific causal conclusions, future research  should explore the stability and composition of hot spots across more crime types, more  units, and with alternative data sources and analytical approaches.

The study has important implications for both research and practice. The findings  highlight the need for research to more carefully consider the assumptions we operate  from when formulating studies, operationalizing variables, and analyzing data. In this  case, the locational stability of hot spots was largely confirmed in the aggregate, though,  there was some unique nuance in individual hot spot stability trajectories. Similarly, hot  spot environmental compositions were seemingly more dynamic in the aggregate assessment of total feature changes but were often highly static on the individual level for most  features recorded within hot spots. Assumptions have exceptions, and research should  consider the ways we handle our approach to data, analysis, and interpretation. This may  require increasingly using micro-level units of analysis, testing outcomes like crime with  greater specificity in selected crimes and sub-types, and examining hot spots at lower  sample sizes. Common practice generally involves treating 1–5% shares of micro-units as  identifiable ‘hot spots,’ but this can easily comprise thousands of units in a jurisdictional  setting. Such approaches limit the use of methods like Google Street View that can help  audit environments of interest, track changes in environmental data over time longitudinally, and help tailor crime prevention efforts to an actionable number of units.

Shifting the field towards prioritizing less ‘hot spot’ units may have salient crime  prevention benefits. Connealy and Hart (2024) found that just the ‘Top 10’ most criminogenic hot spots in several cities had disproportionately large shares of crime occurrence.  We may be able to simultaneously simplify our identification of hot spots to total crime  counts, while still effectuating meaningful changes in crime reduction, all by just focusing  on fewer hot spot units. The findings highlight that individual hot spots have unique  stability trajectories in emerging, persisting, and/or disappearing as hot spots over time.  Similarly, individual hot spots had unique environmental compositions in terms of the  number of features present and the features that were static or dynamic over time.  Researcher understanding of hot spots may require more case-by-case tactics and practitioner approaches to rectifying hot spots may require situational crime prevention to be  undertaken on a singular hot spot unit basis.

## Limitations

The coding effort also required examining each street segment unit in as many of the ten  study years available for 46 different unique environmental features. Relatedly, some missing  data occurred due to GSV availability, though the GSV imagery data was not found to be  missing in a systematic pattern and the comparisons of one available timepoint to the next  could still be plausibly made across image years. Despite the limitations in sample size and  GSV availability, the longitudinal environmental data produced were robust and innovative  relative to prior research that generally treats environmental data as cross-sectional. However,  the second limitation was that many of the results and conclusions generated were reduced  to a more descriptive and exploratory capacity, but important trends were still uncovered  pertaining to hot spot locational stability and environmental compositions. None of the  analyses undertaken are causal in nature, but they do help us see a pathway towards understanding how hot spot locations, features, and interactions may change with time.

The present research has several limitations. First, due to the identification of only the ‘Top  10’ hot spots and gaps in some GSV image availability, the study’s small sample size  limited some of the analytical capacities. The study focused on the ‘Top 10’ to better  understand aggregate and individual hot spot outcomes at an actionable unit threshold  for the GSV coding. This approach also has the added benefit of prioritizing the highest  street robbery locations, and substantial temporal stability was demonstrated at this scale.  However, the total event approach and the discrete nature of the ‘Top 10’ selection  process may mask some of the nuance across hot spots that were on the fringes of the  ‘Top 10’, for example the 15th or 20th most criminogenic unit. To better account for this  potential limitation, sensitivity analyses were executed for the ‘Top 20’ hot spots and the  ‘Top 1%’ of hot spots. Both the ‘Top 20’ and ‘Top 1%’ hot spots demonstrated similar levels  of temporal stability, but the ‘Top 1%’ analysis was less robust due to most units not  experiencing the crime of interest.8  Thereby offering further evidence that the law of  crime concentration can, and should, be effectively scaled from just the ‘Top 10’ most  criminogenic street segments to the 1% of level of units as resources allow (at least for  specific crime types like street robbery).

# Conclusion

The present study empirically tested two commonly held assumptions about hot spot  locational stability (static) and environmental compositions (dynamic). Through an innovative approach to environmental data collection via Google Street View imagery, the  study’s longitudinal approach to assessing hot spot stability and composition yielded  several important findings and implications. The ‘Top 10’ most criminogenic street  robbery hot spots in Seattle had considerably higher locational stability in the aggregate,  but individual hot spots had unique stability trajectories. Furthermore, the total environmental composition of aggregate features in hot spots demonstrated dynamicity, but  individual features varied in their classification as more dynamic or static in hot spots. This  study improves our understanding of hot spot locations and compositions, highlights the  value of incorporating time-situated environmental data in crime and place research, and  suggests that crime prevention efforts should prioritize hot spot-specific strategies that  consider the uniqueness of each hot spot on a case-by-case basis as applicable. The study  also provides additional evidentiary support for the tenets of crime hot spots and the law  of crime concentration. Future research should expand this line of inquiry across different  cities, crime types, and time periods to further refine interventions aimed at achieving  crime reductions in crime hot spots.

# Notes

1.  https://data.seattle.gov/

2.  Each hot spot street segment selected had > 60 robberies during the study period, averaging  over six street robberies on the street segment per year. We also confirmed that all identified  hot spot units experienced a street robbery in every study year as to not convolute comparison to the zero crime control unit group.

3.  The matching variables were street length, land usage, road type, ambient population, traffic  levels, and an exact match set at the neighborhood level (i.e. hot spot and control units had to  be paired within the same neighborhood).

4.  More robust matching output results, including balance tables and jitter plots are available in  Appendix A.

5.  In instances where multiple images were available for a year, the image nearest to the  midpoint  of  the  year  was  selected.  If  a  significant  obstruction  effected  the  imagery,  a different image in that year was selected if available.

6.  There may be unique effects when an environmental indicator is denser on an individual unit,  however, some measures (particularly those in the EDD dimension) are harder to discern as  individual or multiple separate occurrences (like graffiti starting and stopping, for example).  Relatedly, the interaction of EDD on CGAs was also not directly tied to singular locations within  street segments. The mere presence or absence of such features on a unit provides important  insight into the criminogenic potential of predictor presence at such small units of analysis.

7.  Significance thresholds and results may be a byproduct of lower sample sizes, low levels of  recorded features (individually), and sample power. Fisher’s exact tests were used due to low  frequencies, but the results are less powered due to small sample sizes attributable to the  comprehensive coding effort.

8.  The inclusion criteria for being in the top 1% each year was only about two street robbery  occurrences on a street segment. The low counts did not allow for year-to-year stability and  variation to be robustly considered. 

# Author contributions

CRediT:  Nathan T. Connealy:  Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation,  Methodology, Project administration, Software, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing –  review & editing; Peyton Toman: Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Software, Writing  – review & editing.

# Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

# Notes on contributors

Nathan  T.  Connealy  is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Criminology and Criminal  Justice at the University of Tampa. His research focuses on the spatial analysis of crime patterns,  the  intersection  of  policing,  crime  prevention,  and  technology,  and  quantitative  research  designs.  His  scholarship  has  recently  been  published  in  peer-reviewed  outlets  including  Criminology,  Justice  Quarterly,  Criminology  &  Public  Policy,  and  Crime  &  Delinquency  among  others.

Peyton Toman is an undergraduate student at the University of Tampa. Her research and interests  lie at the intersection of criminal justice, cybersecurity, and security consulting. She specializes in  data management and analysis and currently holds an appointment working for a private security  firm.

# References

Andresen, M. A., & Kinney, J. B. (Eds.). (2012). Patterns, prevention, and geometry of crime. Routledge. Bernasco, W., & Block, R. (2011). Robberies in Chicago: A block-level analysis of the influence of crime 

generators, crime attractors, and offender anchor points.  Journal  of  Research  in  Crime  and  Delinquency, 48(1), 33–57. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022427810384135  

Block, R. L., & Block, C. R. (1995). Space, place and crime: Hot spot areas and hot places of  liquor-related crime. Crime and Place, 4(2), 145–184.

Bowers, K. (2014). Risky facilities: Crime radiators or crime absorbers? A comparison of internal and  external levels of theft.  Journal of Quantitative Criminology,  30(3), 389–414.  https://doi.org/10.  1007/s10940-013-9208-z  

Braga, A. A., Papachristos, A. V., & Hureau, D. M. (2010). The concentration and stability of gun  violence at micro places in Boston, 1980-2008. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 26(1), 33–53.   https://doi.org/10.1007/s10940-009-9082-x  

Braga, A. A., Turchan, B. S., Papachristos, A. V., & Hureau, D. M. (2019). Hot spots policing and crime  reduction: An update of an ongoing systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Experimental  Criminology, 15(3), 289–311. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11292-019-09372-3  

Braga, A. A., & Weisburd, D. L. (2020). Does hot spots policing have meaningful impacts on crime?  Findings from an alternative approach to estimating effect sizes from place-based program  evaluations. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 38(1), 1–22.

Brantingham, P., & Brantingham, P. (1995). Criminality of place: Crime generators and crime  attractors. European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research, 3(3), 5–26. https://doi.org/10.1007/  BF02242925  

Brantingham, P. J., & Brantingham, P. L. (2008). Crime pattern theory pg. In R. Wortley & L Mazerolle  (Eds.), Environmental criminology and crime analysis (pp. 78–93). Wilson.

Brantingham, P. L., & Brantingham, P. J. (1993). Environment, routine, and situation: Toward  a pattern theory of crime. In Ronald V. Clarke Marcus Felson (Eds.), Routine activity and rational  choice (pp. 259–294). Routledge.

Clarke, R. V. (1995). Situational crime prevention. Crime and Justice, 19, 91–150. https://doi.org/10.  1086/449230   Cohen, L. E., & Felson, M. (1979). Social change and crime rate trends: A routine activity approach. In  Classics in environmental criminology (pp. 588–608). Routledge.

Connealy, N., Piza, E., & Hatten, D. (2020). The criminogenic effect of marijuana dispensaries in  Denver, Colorado: A microsynthetic control quasi-experiment and cost-benefit analysis. Justice  Evaluation Journal, 3(1), 69–93. https://doi.org/10.1080/24751979.2019.1691934  

Connealy, N. T. (2021). Understanding the predictors of street robbery hot spots: A matched pairs  analysis and systematic social observation. Crime & Delinquency, 67(9), 1319–1352. https://doi.  org/10.1177/0011128720926116  

Connealy, N. T. (2023). The influence, saliency, and consistency of environmental crime predictors:  A probability score matching approach to test what makes a hot spot hot. Justice Quarterly, 40(5),  670–693. https://doi.org/10.1080/07418825.2022.2106292  

Connealy, N. T., & Hart, T. C. (2024). Top 10’policing as an alternative place-based strategy:  Responding to the overcomplication and underestimation of the law of crime concentration.  Police Practice and Research, 25(1), 71–89. https://doi.org/10.1080/15614263.2023.2183202  

Connealy, N. T., & Piza, E. L. (2019). Risk factor and high-risk place variations across different robbery  targets in Denver, Colorado.  Journal  of  Criminal  Justice,  60, 47–56.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.  jcrimjus.2018.11.003  

Curman, A. S., Andresen, M. A., & Brantingham, P. J. (2015). Crime and place: A longitudinal  examination of street segment patterns in Vancouver, BC. Journal of Quantitative Criminology,  31(1), 127–147. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10940-014-9228-3  

Demeau, E., & Parent, G. (2018). Impacts of crime attractors and generators on criminality in  Montreal. Canadian Journal of Criminology and Criminal Justice, 60(3), 387–412. https://doi.org/  10.3138/cjccj.2017-0028.r1  

Eck, J., Chainey, S., Cameron, J., & Wilson, R. (2005). Mapping crime: Understanding hotspots. Eck, J. E., Clarke, R. V., & Guerette, R. T. (2007). Risky facilities: Crime concentration in homogeneous 

sets of establishments and facilities. Crime Prevention Studies, 21, 225. Eck, J. E., & Guerette, R. T. (2012). “Own the place, own the crime” prevention.  The  Future  of  Criminology, 166–177.

Fotheringham, A. S., & Wong, D. W. (1991). The modifiable areal unit problem in multivariate  statistical analysis.  Environment  and  Planning  A,  23(7), 1025–1044.  https://doi.org/10.1068/  a231025  

Gale, J. A., & Coupe, T. (2005). The behavioural, emotional and psychological effects of street robbery  on  victims.  International  Review  of  Victimology,  12(1),  1–22.  https://doi.org/10.1177/  026975800501200101  

Gau, J. M., & Pratt, T. C. (2008). Broken windows or window dressing? Citizens’(in) ability to tell the  difference between disorder and crime. Criminology & Public Policy, 7(2), 163–194. https://doi.org/  10.1111/j.1745-9133.2008.00500.x  

Gill, C., Wooditch, A., & Weisburd, D. (2017). Testing the “law of crime concentration at place” in  a suburban setting: Implications for research and practice. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 33 

(3), 519–545. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10940-016-9304-y  

Grubesic, T. H., Pridemore, W. A., Williams, D. A., & Philip-Tabb, L. (2013). Alcohol outlet density and  violence: The role of risky retailers and alcohol-related expenditures. Alcohol & Alcoholism, 48(5),  613–619. https://doi.org/10.1093/alcalc/agt055  

Hardyns, W., Snaphaan, T., & Pauwels, L. J. (2019). Crime concentrations and micro places: An  empirical test of the “law of crime concentration at places” in Belgium. The Australian & New  Zealand Journal of Criminology, 52(3), 390–410. https://doi.org/10.1177/0004865818807243  

Hart, T. C. (2021). Investigating crime pattern stability at micro-temporal intervals: Implications for  crime analysis and hotspot policing strategies. Criminal Justice Review, 46(2), 173–189. https://doi.  org/10.1177/0734016821996785  

He, L., Páez, A., & Liu, D. (2017). Built environment and violent crime: An environmental audit  approach using Google Street View.  Computers,  Environment  and  Urban  Systems,  66, 83–95.   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2017.08.001  

Hipp, J. R. (2010). Resident perceptions of crime and disorder: How much is “bias”, and how much is  social environment differences? Criminology, 48(2), 475–508. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-9125.  2010.00193.x  

Ho, D., Imai, K., King, G., & Stuart, E. A. (2011). MatchIt: Nonparametric preprocessing for parametric  causal inference. Journal of Statistical Software, 42(8), 1–28. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v042.i08  

Hsu, K. H., & Miller, J. (2017). Assessing the situational predictors of drug markets across street  segments and intersections. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 54(6), 902–929. https://  doi.org/10.1177/0022427817714574  

Hur, M., & Nasar, J. L. (2014). Physical upkeep, perceived upkeep, fear of crime and neighborhood  satisfaction.  Journal of  Environmental Psychology,  38, 186–194.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.  2014.02.001  

Kennedy, L. W., Caplan, J. M., & Piza, E. (2011). Risk clusters, hotspots, and spatial intelligence: Risk  terrain modeling as an algorithm for police resource allocation strategies. Journal of Quantitative  Criminology, 27(3), 339–362. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10940-010-9126-2  

Kubrin, C. E., & Hipp, J. R. (2016). Do fringe banks create fringe neighborhoods? Examining the spatial  relationship between fringe banking and neighborhood crime rates.  Justice  Quarterly,  33(5),  755–784. https://doi.org/10.1080/07418825.2014.959036  

Langton, S. H., & Steenbeek, W. (2017). Residential burglary target selection: An analysis at the  property-level using Google Street View.  Applied  Geography,  86, 292–299.  https://doi.org/10.  1016/j.apgeog.2017.06.014  

McCord, E. S., Ratcliffe, J. H., Garcia, R. M., & Taylor, R. B. (2007). Nonresidential crime attractors and  generators elevate perceived neighborhood crime and incivilities. Journal of Research in Crime  and Delinquency, 44(3), 295–320. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022427807301676  

Odgers, C. L., Caspi, A., Bates, C. J., Sampson, R. J., & Moffitt, T. E. (2012). Systematic social observation  of children’s neighborhoods using Google Street View: A reliable and cost-effective method.  Journal  of  Child  Psychology  and  Psychiatry,  53(10), 1009–1017.  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-  7610.2012.02565.x  

Piza, E. L., & Connealy, N. T. (2022). The effect of the Seattle police-free CHOP zone on crime:  A microsynthetic control evaluation. Criminology & Public Policy, 21(1), 35–58. https://doi.org/10.  1111/1745-9133.12570  

Rasmusson, M., & Helbich, M. (2020). The relationship between near-repeat street robbery and the  environment: Evidence from Malmö, Sweden. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information, 9(4), 

188. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijgi9040188  

Rickson, C., Hart, T., Paez, G., & Connealy, N. (2023). Are measures of patrollability affected by  Tessellating  Shape:  Implications  for  grid-based  crime  hot  spot  maps.  Journal  of  Student  Research, 12(3). https://doi.org/10.47611/jsr.v12i3.1972  

Schnell, C., & McManus, H. D. (2022). The influence of temporal specification on the identification of  crime hot spots for program evaluations: A test of longitudinal stability in crime patterns. Journal  of Quantitative Criminology, 38(1) , 1–24.

Sherman, L. W., & Weisburd, D. (1995). General deterrent effects of police patrol in crime “hot spots”:  A  randomized,  controlled  trial.  Justice  Quarterly,  12(4),  625–648.  https://doi.org/10.1080/  07418829500096221  

Skogan, W. G., & Steiner, L. (2004). Crime, disorder and decay in Chicago’s Latino community. Journal  of Ethnicity in Criminal Justice, 2(1–2), 7–26. https://doi.org/10.1300/J222v02n01_02  

Sytsma, V. A., Connealy, N., & Piza, E. L. (2021). Environmental predictors of a drug offender crime  script: A systematic social observation of Google Street View images and CCTV footage. Crime &  Delinquency, 67(1), 27–57. https://doi.org/10.1177/0011128720910961  

Telep, C. W., & Hibdon, J. (2019).  Understanding and responding to crime and disorder hot spots.  Department of Justice.

Theron, K., Breetzke, G. D., Snyman, L., & Edelstein, I. (2023). A street segment analysis of crime in  a township: Evidence from South Africa. Police Practice and Research, 24(5), 539–557. https://doi.  org/10.1080/15614263.2022.2147070  

Vandeviver, C. (2014). Applying Google Maps and Google Street View in criminological research.  Crime Science, 3(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40163-014-0013-2   Weisburd, D. (2015). The law of crime concentration and the criminology of place. Criminology, 53(2),  133–157. https://doi.org/10.1111/1745-9125.12070   Weisburd, D. (2018). Hot spots of crime and place-based prevention. Criminology & Public Policy, 17 

(1), 5–25. https://doi.org/10.1111/1745-9133.12350  

Weisburd, D., Braga, A. A., Groff, E. R., & Wooditch, A. (2017). Can hot spots policing reduce crime in  urban areas? An agent-based simulation. Criminology, 55(1), 137–173. https://doi.org/10.1111/  1745-9125.12131  

Weisburd, D., Groff, E. R., & Yang, S. M. (2012). The criminology of place: Street segments and our  understanding of the crime problem. Oxford University Press.

Weisburd, D., Kuen, K., Uding, C. V., & Ready, J. (2025). Antisocial and prosocial activities at crime hot  spots: Rethinking conventional paradigms. Urban Studies, 00420980251319208. https://doi.org/  10.1177/00420980251319208  

Weisburd, D., & Majmundar, M. K. (2018). Proactive policing. Effects on crime and communities (2018).  National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, Division of Behavioral and Social  Sciences and Education.

Weisburd, D., & Mazerolle, L. G. (2000). Crime and disorder in drug hot spots: Implications for theory  and  practice  in  policing.  Police  Quarterly,  3(3),  331–349.  https://doi.org/10.1177/  1098611100003003006  

Weisburd, D., Petrosino, A., & Mason, G. (1993). Design sensitivity in criminal justice experiments.  Crime and Justice, 17, 337–379. https://doi.org/10.1086/449216  

Weisburd, D., Wyckoff, L. A., Ready, J., Eck, J. E., Hinkle, J. C., & Gajewski, F. (2006). Does crime just  move around the corner? A controlled study of spatial displacement and diffusion of crime  control benefits. Criminology, 44(3), 549–592. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-9125.2006.00057.x  

Weisburd, D., Zastrow, T., Kuen, K., & Andresen, M. (2024). Crime concentrations at micro places:  A review of the evidence. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 78, 101979. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.  avb.2024.101979  

Wilcox, P., & Eck, J. E. (2011). Criminology of the unpopular: Implications for policy aimed at payday  lending facilities. Criminology & Public Policy, 10(2), 473. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-9133.2011.  00721.x

