Journal of Quantitative Criminology

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10940-025-09636-4

ORIGINAL PAPER

Ockham’s Razor and the Measurement of Crime  Concentrations at Places

Martin A. Andresen1  · David Weisburd2,3

Received: 18 March 2025 / Accepted: 19 September 2025

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2025

Abstract

Objectives  Review and assess the primary metrics used in the crime and place literature to  measure concentrations of crime, discussing their utility and limitations. We also propose  a new metric that meets the criterion of Ockham’s razor, and is based on the 50-X metric  proposed by Weisburd (2015) in identifying the law of crime concentration—the percentage  of street segments that account for 50% of crime.

Methods  Calculations of metrics using simulations, theoretical examples, and empirical  examples are used to compare 7 different metrics of crime concentration: our new metric,  the 50-X metric, the 5-X metric (Hipp and Kim 2017), the adjusted 50-X metric (Andresen and Malleson 2011), the Generalized Gini coefficient and the standard Gini coefficient  (Bernasco and Steenbeek 2017), and the marginal crime concentration metric (Chalfin et  al. 2021).

Results  We show that different metrics can provide very different information regarding  crime concentrations, and some of these metrics are quite sensitive to sample size issues,  computational complexity, and interpretability. A new metric, the generalized 50-X measure, is developed that addresses the issue of small Ns of crimes relative to streets, and that  is easy to compute and interpret.

Conclusions  The utility of different measures of concentrations relates both to the principle  of Ockham’s razor, and to the specific goals of the metric. We argue that the generalized  50-X measure is consistent with policy interest in hot spots of crime, and that it adheres to  the principle of Ockham’s razor.

Keywords  Law of crime concentration · Crime and place · Measurement · Generalized  gini coefficient

One of the consistencies in the crime and place research is reference to, if not confirmation  of, the law of crime concentration at places. This law states that “for a defined measure of  crime at a specific microgeographic unit, the concentration of crime will fall within a narrow  bandwidth of percentages for a defined cumulative proportion of crime” (Weisburd 2015,  p. 138). In the original formulation, relying on data from 8 cities, 50% of crime was found  within a bandwidth of 2.1 and 6% of streets, and an average level of crime concentration of  4.5%. A recent review including 49 estimates of crime concentrations drawn from studies in  multiple countries found a bandwidth of between 1.1 and 11% of streets, and also an average  crime concentration level of 4.5%. Looking at the interquartile range, the bandwidth was 3.2  to 5.7% (Weisburd et al. 2024). The law stated in this way emphasizes the degree to which  crime is highly concentrated in cities at crime hot spots, and has been used to support the  underlying principle of concentrating crime prevention resources such as the police at hot  spots of crime (Braga et al. 2019; Braga and Weisburd 2022).

Introduction

Extended author information available on the last page of the article

1 3

That crime is concentrated at places (however one wishes to define places) is far from a  contentious statement. Rather, crime concentrations have been observed dating back at least  200 years (Quetelet 1831; Weisburd et al. 2009) and could easily be stated as one of the  empirical regularities within criminology at every level of geography. Despite this, as soon  as Weisburd (2015) made this claim, commentary and criticism of his statement and metric  followed. Some of this commentary was to make small changes to the metric without denying its claims (Andresen and Malleson 2011), others have proposed different metrics (Bernasco and Steenbeek 2017), and others have denied the law of crime concentration at places  (Hipp and Kim 2017), or questioned its broad applicability across cities (Lee et al. 2017).

In this paper, we discuss and decompose the various metrics used to measure crime  concentration at places. This is an important issue for the crime and place literature, and  especially for the spatial modelling of crime concentration from a theoretical and a practical  perspective. We assess the different measures in the context of Ockham’s razor, a principle  attributed to a medieval monk and philosopher, William of Ockham, which states that the  explanation that is most parsimonious should be preferred (Schaffer 2015). His oft stated  principal “Entities are not to be multiplied without necessity” (Non sunt multiplicanda entia  sine necessitate; Schaffer 2015), emphasizes the value of looking for less complex theories  and metrics to understand the natural world. The importance of simplicity was also emphasized by the Greek philosopher Ptolemy who stated: “We consider it a good principle to  explain the phenomena by the simplest hypothesis possible” (Franklin 2001, p. 241).

Why is this important? The concentration of crime is not simply an academic curiosity. Rather, it has implications for public policy and corresponding interventions for its  prevention. Though no metric is perfect, any metric used should allow for longitudinal and  cross-sectional comparisons as best as possible. As a consequence, any impact on the concentration of crime from a criminal justice or social program intervention can be better  assessed temporally to measure effects but also across jurisdictions to compare results or  set expectations. And because the implementation of such interventions are often conducted  by practitioners, the importance of Ockham’s razor is that much more applicable: a metric  should be used that is easy to calculate and interpret.

We think it important to recognize that Ockham’s razor may lead to the preference of  different metrics depending on the goal of a particular metric or approach. As we illustrate  below, the different metrics that have been proposed for describing crime concentrations  answer somewhat different questions. We argue that in illustrating the very strong concentration of crime at place, Weisburd’s 50% of crime at X percent of places (50-X) provides  the metric that most fits the criterion of Ockham’s razor and the importance of understanding  the concentration as stated above. At the same time, this metric provides biased outcomes  when the number of crimes becomes smaller than the number of streets. To address this bias  we provide a correction, drawing from the approach of the Generalized Gini Coefficient.

Weisburd’s 50-X Metric

The original metric proposed by Weisburd (2015) begins with a starting point of 50% of  crime, and calculating the percentage of street segments necessary to account for that 50%.1 Henceforth, we refer to this as the 50-X metric. Within criminology, this is a place-based  parallel to the same rule put forth for individual offending (Wolfgang et al. 1972). And to  the broader natural world, the 50-X metric is a corollary to the 80 − 20 rule, or the Pareto  principle (Pareto 1896).

This metric has the important and attractive quality of ease of interpretation (Chalfin et  al. 2021) and it is easy to calculate making it pragmatic for most contexts. Also, this metric  provides a simple and straight forward illustration of the consistent strong concentration of  crime at places as indicated from scores of empirical studies (see Weisburd et al. 2024). And  it also provides for policy makers and practitioners an easily understandable way to identify  the policy implications of a law of crime concentration—suggesting that a small number of  streets produce a large proportion of the crime problem.

However, the 50-X metric says nothing of the distribution of crime within the 50% of  crimes, aside from the fact that X percent of places (street segments) need to be contained  within those street segments; these street segments may be clustered (Groff et al. 2010;  Curman et al. 2015), but they may also be dispersed. This means that this approach is an  inadequate metric for understanding the general distribution of crime at micro geographic  units in the city. We discuss measures more appropriate for this goal below.

While the 50-X metric is simple to calculate, easy to interpret and, consequently, follows  the principle of Ockham’s razor, it is important to note that when the number of crimes  becomes smaller than the number of places it will exaggerate the degree of crime concentration. As an extreme example of this, if there were 10,000 streets in a city but only 1000  crimes, the minimal level of concentration (maximal dispersion of these crimes: only one  crime one each of 1000 street segments) that could be observed would be 10% (1000/10,000).  Accordingly, in this situation, 50% of crimes would be found at 5% of streets, with no real  clustering of crime at place. While this scenario is likely to be uncommon when examining  all crimes in a city, it will become more likely when examining crime concentrations for  specific types of crimes and especially types of crime that occur relatively rarely (e.g. see  Weisburd et al. 2024).

The 5-X metric was put forth by Hipp and Kim (2017), and was also used by Lee et al. (2017).  It flips the 50-X metric on its head by asking about the percentage of crime accounted for by  the top 5% of street segments. While on average they found a similar average level of crime  concentration to Weisburd (2015) of 50%, they report a bandwidth of crime concentrations  that is extremely large (15 to 90%).

5-X metric

1  We note that Weisburd’s original proposition allowed for the definition of any proportion of crime, and was  used also to identify the proportion of streets that produced 25% of crime. For brevity we focus on the most  used metric of 50%.

Weisburd et al. (2024) show that these large bandwidths calculated using the 5-X metric actually follow closely the findings of Weisburd (2015) when they are converted to a  50-X metric. Why is this occurring using the same types of concentrations? This is simply  because of the inverted ratio. If you have a large magnitude numerator and a low magnitude  denominator, changing the denominator a little bit can change the value of the ratio by a  large degree. The same cannot be said for the inverse case. This is why the 50-X metric  provides a more stable indicator for illustrating a law of crime concentration.

One way to show this point mathematically is by comparing the difference in logits. For  example, we analyzed data in two cities2 that appeared to show very large bandwidths using  the 5-X metric. For one city the crime concentration level was 38.3%, while in the other  city it was 60.9%. But if we examine the same cities using the 50-X metric the bandwidth  becomes 2.7 to 8.1%, much closer to that suggested by Weisburd (2015). Indeed, if we examine the difference in logits we obtain: (1) ln(0.081/(1–0.081) - ln(0.027/(1–0.027) = 1.16; (2)  ln(0.609/(1–0.609) - ln(0.383/(1–0.383) = 0.92. This comparison indicates that if we were to  analyze these data on the logistic distribution, they suggest about the same level of concentration. Indeed, the second equation (examining the proportion of crime produced by a set  proportion of streets) actually has slightly less variability.

What does this all mean? A claim that the 5-X method falsifies the law of crime concentration at places is incorrect. This is done on the foundation that this metric was designed in  order to address the level of crime concentration across different cities and the corresponding  challenges researchers encounter when comparing (different sized) cities. However, because  it inverts the 50-X metric and provides a view of crime concentrations that emphasizes the  magnitude of a band of concentrations, it also produces large variability for relatively small  changes. In this sense, it is a problematic method to use for describing the importance of hot  spots of crime, particularly across cities, though it has the benefit of emphasizing that even  when crime concentrations are strong, there is still variability between cities. Finally, we  note as well that this approach becomes biased, like the 50-X approach, when the number of  crimes becomes smaller than the number of geographic unites examined.

50-X metric excluding streets with no crime (Adjusted 50-X metric)

The first modification to the metric put forth by Weisburd was a simple one that changed the  denominator when calculating the percentage of street segments that accounted for 50% of  crimes. This metric maintains the interpretability of the original metric without complicating the calculation of the metric itself. Put forth by Andresen and Malleson (2011), rather  than dividing by the number of street segments in the study area (10,000 in the scenarios  above) the percentage should be calculated based on how many street segments actually had  any crime. Used in subsequent research (Andresen et al. 2017a, b; Levin et al. 2017), this  metric measures the percentage of street segments that account for 50% of crime on street  segments that actually have any crime.

2  These data are maintained in our research center, but their locations are anonymous as per agreements  with the agencies involved. This example, however, is meant to be illustrative of the mathematics of these  calculations.

This modification answers a slightly different question that the 50-X metric. And it is  important to note that it does not include bias when the number of crimes is less than the  number of streets, because it does not use the number of streets in the city as the denominator but rather the number of streets with any crime. However, this approach can lead to  anomalies from a policy perspective.

The adjusted 50-X metric tells us the extent to which crime is concentrated among streets  that have any crime, it doesn’t tell us how concentrated crime is across streets in a city. We  think that this information is important. For example, once it is established that crime is  concentrated across the city, the researcher or policy maker may naturally want to ask to  what extent there is concentration among places with crime. But using the adjusted 50-X as  a metric can lead to misinterpreting crime concentrations and, in particular, underestimating  such concentration. For example, imagine a situation in which there are 1,000 streets and  2,000 crimes, and 5% (or 50) of the streets produce 50% of crime. In this same example,  let us say that 50% of streets have no crime. Among the 50% of streets (500) with crime,  this would mean that half of crimes occurred on 10% of streets with any crime. This is an  important metric, but it doubles the concentration level we would observe looking across  all streets in a city.

Gini Coefficient and the Lorenz Curve

Bernasco and Steenbeek (2017) put forth the Gini coefficient because it allows for the comparison of the entire distribution of crime concentrations using the Lorenz curve. Though  the Gini coefficient can take a number of forms, Bernasco and Steenbeek (2017) use Eq. 1 for computational ease:

G = ( 1 n )(2 ∑ n i=1 (iyi) − n − 1) (1)

where n is the number of street segments or places, yi is the percentage of crimes at place i,  and i is the ranked order of the places that are ordered by the number of crimes, y. This index  gives a value that ranges between 0 (perfect equality) and 1 (perfect inequality).

The Gini coefficient is based on the Lorenz curve that plots the cumulative proportion of  streets segments and the cumulative proportion of crime, see Fig. 1 as a general example.  Tests of the law of crime concentration at places using (deviations from) the 50 − 5 rule  consider only one point on the Lorenz curve. As such, calculating the Gini coefficient and  Lorenz curve will provide the researcher with a fuller picture of the nature of crime concentrations. The Lorenz curve had the added benefit of being able to plot multiple curves in  one chart allowing for a visual representation for comparative analyses. This may prove to  be instructive when comparing multiple crime types within one city or the same crime type  across a number of cities.

One limitation of the Gini coefficient, that is also present for all of the global measures  of crime concentration discussed here, is that two study areas with the same Gini coefficient  do not necessarily have the same percentage of street segments for 50% of crimes; in other  words, the same Gini coefficient does not mean the same crime distribution. In this context,  the Gini coefficient does not illustrate the relative rarity of crime concentrations, providing  a picture of the distribution of crime at place across the entire range of values. This is valuable information, but it does not focus our interests on the extent of crime concentration in  hot spots of crime. Though present in all measures of crime concentration, it is important to  note that the Gini coefficient does not resolve this issue.

One advantage of the Gini coefficient, however, is that it is based on areas under curves.  Consequently, it may be interpreted as the percentage of crimes (or whatever is being measured) that need to be redistributed to have equality in its distribution, or a Gini coefficient  value of zero (Rogerson 2013). If the Gini coefficient has a value of 0, there is equality in  the distribution of crime, so no crime has to be redistributed in order to have equality in  distribution. Conversely, if the Gini coefficient has a value of 1, all of crime is concentrated  at one place, so 100% of the crime (or nearly 100%) has to be redistributed in order to have  equality in distribution. Importantly, the Gini coefficient, like the previous measures, also  provides a biased estimate of crime concentration when the number of crimes becomes  smaller than the number of geographic units studied (Bernasco and Steenbeek 2017).

Another limitation of the Gini coefficient is its interpretability. It is a ratio of (Area A)/ (Area A + Area B), ranging from zero (equality of distribution) to unity (complete concentration). Though the Gini coefficient ranges from 0 to 1 making it appear to have an easy  interpretation with regard to the law of crime concentration at places (as the Gini coefficient  converges towards 1, concentration increases), as noted above, this isn’t necessarily the  case. Because of this, if the Gini coefficient is to be used to test the law of crime concentration at places, it needs to be modified to be able to compare Gini coefficient values across  study areas and different contexts.

Measuring Crime Concentration at Places: Accounting for Fewer Crimes  than Places

As we have noted above, with the exception of the 50-X metric excluding streets with no  crime, the measures we have reviewed have the limitation of providing biased metrics when  the number of crimes is smaller than the number of geographic units being studied. However, Bernasco and Steenbeek (2017) have developed an adjusted measure they term the  generalized Gini coefficient (Bernasco and Steenbeek 2017) to account for this bias. Below  we use the approach suggested by Bernasco and Steenbeek to develop a generalized 50-X  metric to correct for bias in that approach as well.

The Generalized Gini Coefficient and Lorenz Curve

The Gini coefficient overestimates the degree of inequality (i.e. concentration in the current  context) when there are fewer crimes and places. Bernasco and Steenbeek (2017) generalize  the Gini coefficient in the following manner to correct for this bias:

G′ = max( 1 c , 1 n )(2 ∑ n i=1 (iyi) − n − 1) − max(n c , 1) + 1 (2)

where c is the number of crimes. When c ≥ n, G’ = G, but when c < n, the generalized Gini  coefficient, G’, is corrected downward to provide a more accurate representation of concentration. This is shown below in the empirical example of the different metrics that we  provide.

Other Modifications of the Gini Coefficient

There are a few notable adaptations, or modifications, to the Gini coefficient that are worth  noting here in the context of crime concentrations that attempt to address the issue of having  fewer crimes than places. Curiel and Bishop (2016) and Curiel et al. (2018) estimate Gini  coefficients and Lorenz curves that consider both the population at risk of victimization of  crime and the underlying distribution of crime to identify concentrations crime. Though an  important consideration, as noted by Mohler et al. (2019), these metrics model the crime  rate as a function of the population at risk in each spatial unit and such estimates are not  always available at the micro-spatial unit of analysis (street segments or small area grids)  (Mohler et al. 2019). Moreover, estimates of the population at risk have long been known  to introduce bias into crime rate calculations, potentially leading to multiplicative errors in  such calculations (Boggs 1965; Andresen and Jenion 2008).

Mohler et al. (2019) extended the work of Curiel and Bishop (2016) considering an alternative underlying distribution of crime for concentration comparisons. This is an important  factor to consider because the underlying distribution for the Gini coefficient is uniformity  when we have known that crime has not followed a uniform or random distribution for at  least 200 years (Andresen and Hodgkinson 2025; Quetelet 1831; Weisburd et al. 2009).  Though important, using a specific distribution as a baseline is also problematic: using a  specific distribution within a family of distributions cannot be expected to provide much  insight into the distribution of crime. Any statistical testing or comparisons only state that  the distribution of crime does not follow that specific distribution. Moreover, such methods,  though good theoretically, violate the principle of Ockham’s razor and the ease for such  measurements to be used, especially by practitioners.

Lastly,  O’Brien  (2019)  also  considers  an  alternative  underlying  distribution  for  the  comparisons of crime concentrations, but is focused more on the nested nature of the Gini  coefficient. This method considers concentrations within concentrations: the level of concentrations within different neighborhoods (census tracts) of a city and then street segments  within each of those census tracts.

The Marginal Crime Concentration Metric

Another criticism by Hipp and Kim (2017) that is more fundamental relates to the implicit  baseline comparison when considering the 50-X metric, a uniform distribution. Is this realistic or would crime (or any set of events) cluster at random? This is an issue formally  investigated by Chalfin et al. (2021).

In addition to the fewer crimes than places criticism, one of the criticisms of using either  of these metrics to measure crime concentration is that crime concentrations could simply  emerge at random (Chalfin et al. 2021). As discussed above, when there are fewer crimes  than places, we can expect crime concentrations to be high simply because there are not  many crimes. However, even when there are enough crimes to have at all places, Chalfin et  al. (2021) found that when there are the same number of crimes as there are places, 50% of  crime is accounted for by 20% of places just by random chance. As the number of crimes  increases, the number of places increases to 50%, as one would expect with randomly distributed data, but this does not go beyond 40% of places until there are at least 10 times the  number of crimes than places.

Though this may sound problematic, it should not be a surprise. In fact, this is somewhat of a non-issue in practice when we consider the 50 − 5 metric in its original intent (all  crimes in a city), having at least 10 times the number of crimes than places is often the case.  Regardless, Chalfin et al. (2021) provide an alternative metric to use, the index of marginal  crime concentration:

mcckijt = cckijt − cckijt∗, (3)

where  mcckijt measures marginal crime concentration in city i, for crime type j, for time  period t, and crime share k—k is most often 50% of crime.  cckijt is the crime concentration  actually measured and  cckijt∗ is the crime concentration for the context under randomization  with replacement.

The marginal crime concentration metric has its appeal because it accounts for the concentration that may occur under complete randomness. It does, however, have some limitations. First, the intuitive nature of the 50 − 5 metric is no longer present. If  mcckijt =  5, it can be from comparing 5 to 10% of places or 45 to 50% of places. Of course, this  could be complemented with the original metric and the expected random concentration, or  some ratio, but the easy of interpretability is, at best, reduced. Second, in order to calculate  mcckijt, cckijt∗ needs to be simulated. Such a simulation may be straightforward to some, but  not always a practical expectation in the practitioner world, in particular.

Though instructive in its own right, it does not allow for appropriate testing of the law  of crime concentration at places because it only states the absolute difference in expected  versus actual concentration without an easy interpretation of how concentrated crime actually is. Its focus is on assessing the degree to which estimates of crime concentration do not  account for the degree of stochasticity of estimates gained from actual data.

The Generalized 50-X Metric

In an effort to maintain the characteristic of ease of interpretation of the 50-X metric, its  relevance to hot spots interventions, and incorporate the generalized aspect of the Gini coefficient put forth by Bernasco and Steenbeek (2017), we propose a generalized 50-X metric  for tests of the law of crime concentration at places. Similar to the modification put forth  by Andresen and Malleson (2011), we argue that the denominator, Y, for the percentage  of street segments should only be the total number of street segments when the number of  crimes is greater than or equal to the number of street segments, c ≥ N. However, if c < N,  then the denominator should be c. This is similar to what Andresen and Malleson (2011)  proposed but, as noted above, their modification did not consider the maximum possible dispersion of crime, only the actual dispersion of crime to identify the denominator.

We call this the generalized 50-X metric and it is defined as follows:

Generalized 50 − X metric = ∑ c i=1SSi min(n, N) (4)

This generalized 50-X metric provides an easy interpretation: what percentage of street  segments account for 50% of crime, considering the number of places where crime can occur if crime were maximally dispersed. With this metric, comparisons over time within a  single jurisdiction are going to be better measured, particularly when there are few crimes  relative to the number of places. Similarly, the generalized 50-X is well-suited for comparisons across jurisdictions because it accounts for the number of places crime can occur.  Additionally, this metric is better suited, similar to the generalized Gini coefficient, for  comparisons across jurisdictions because it accounts for the number of places where crime  can occur rather than how many places there are within a municipal boundary. This makes  the generalized 50-X metric of use for those interested in testing theoretical relationships  between crime concentrations and place-based characteristics, an area of research that needs  development (Weisburd et al. 2024), but also for practitioners to define and evaluate their  interventions and compare results of said intervention across jurisdictions.

where SSi represents street segment i, c is the number of street segments (ranked from highest to lowest count of crime) necessary to account for 50% of crime in the study area, n is  the number of crimes, N is the total number of street segments, and min(n, N) is the number  of street segments to account for maximal dispersion of crime, the total number of street  segments if n ≥ N and n, otherwise. This index maintains the ease of interpretation as the  original proposed by Weisburd (2015) with a modification that allows for the maximum  possible dispersion of crime to be accounted for when c < N. Moreover, it does not require  any coding or simulations in its calculation, making it easy to calculate using a spreadsheet.

Using the original 50-X metric gives practitioners the percentage of streets if crime is  maximally dispersed. If crime cannot occur everywhere because there are fewer crimes than  places, this underestimates the percentage of places where crime does occur for actionable  insights. Yes, interventions may only need to be implemented in some small percentage of  the entire city, but if there are fewer crimes than places, the 50-X metric may lead to interpretations that crime is more concentrated than it really is. As shown in the example below  and in previous research, some crime may appear to be concentrated within a city because  there are fewer crimes than places when it is actually close to being uniformly distributed  where it actually occurs. Consequently, the impact of any intervention on one place will be  minimal from a crime count perspective.

The generalized 50-X metric does not allow for the testing of stability over time in the  context of which street segments remain hotspots over time, or for testing for the spatial  clustering of hotspots. However, this is not the purpose of this metric or any of the metric  of crime concentrations discussed here. Group-based trajectory modeling or local spatial  statistics are the appropriate statistical techniques for these purposes (Andresen et al. 2017a,  b; Anselin 1995; Curman et al. 2015; Weisburd et al. 2004, 2012).

An Empirical Comparison of the Different Metrics

To illustrate how the different measures we have reviewed illustrate crime concentrations,  and some of the limitations we have noted above, we now turn to an empirical comparison  of the different metrics. We focus in on specific crime types because those are most likely to  evidence biases due to the number of crimes being smaller than the number of geographic  units. Our examples of specific crimes allow both for the scenario of more crimes than  places and for the scenario of fewer crimes than places.

For this illustration we use open data from the Vancouver Police department, h t t p s : / / v p  d . c a / c r i m e - s t a t i s t i c s / . These open crime data include all property-related crime types at the  point level that are then assigned to and aggregated at the street segment level in the City  of Vancouver: commercial burglary, residential burglary, mischief, theft, theft from vehicle,  theft of bicycle, theft of vehicle, and total property crime—total property crime is the sum  of the other crime types listed. For context, though we only analyze 2024 data, Fig. 2 shows  the counts of property crime in Vancouver, yearly, from 2003 to 2024. Consistent with the  international crime drop (Farrell et al. 2014, 2018), property crime in Vancouver decreased  substantially from 2003 until 2011, with a steady increase from 2012 to 2019. In 2020, property crime in Vancouver, and around the world, decreased substantially (Hodgkinson and  Andresen 2020; Nivette et al. 2021; Andresen and Hodgkinson 2023). For the past 5 years,  though moderately volatile, property crime in Vancouver has remained at approximately  30,000 criminal events each year.

|Table 1 Crime counts, streets (total N = 13,102), and percentages|Table 1 Crime counts, streets (total N = 13,102), and percentages|Table 1 Crime counts, streets (total N = 13,102), and percentages|Table 1 Crime counts, streets (total N = 13,102), and percentages|Table 1 Crime counts, streets (total N = 13,102), and percentages|Table 1 Crime counts, streets (total N = 13,102), and percentages|Table 1 Crime counts, streets (total N = 13,102), and percentages|Table 1 Crime counts, streets (total N = 13,102), and percentages|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Crime Type|Crime  event  count|Number of  streets, any  crime|% streets,  any crime|% of  streets,  land use|50% of  crime|50% of  crime,  count of  streets|Crimes,  top  5% of  streets|
|Theft of vehicle|626|562|4.29|100|313|249|626|
|Theft of bicycle|923|644|4.92|100|462|183|923|
|Burglary, Residential|961|788|6.01|86.3|481|308|828|
|Burglary, Commercial|1290|799|6.1|19.1|645|206|1146|
|Mischief|5388|2294|17.51|100|2694|298|3557|
|Theft from vehicle|5872|2761|21.07|100|2936|378|3522|
|Theft|13,453|2461|18.78|100|6727|52|11,241|
|Property crime, total|28,513|5461|41.68|100|14,257|222|18,822|


Regarding the discussion above for the total number of street segments, N, there are a  total of 13,102 street segments in Vancouver. The counts of each property crime type listed  above, the number of street segments that have at least one criminal event (and their percentage of the city), and the percentage of street segments that can have the corresponding crime  type are all shown in Table 1. Based on the count of crimes, we can see that the 50-X metric  and the generalized 50-X metric will be the same for both theft and total property crime  because the number of criminal events is greater than the number of street segments—this  is also true for the Gini coefficient and the generalized Gini coefficients. We can also see  that count and percentage of places that have any crime (at least one criminal event on a  street segment) varies by crime type (Andresen and Linning 2012). Lastly, Table 1 includes  the number of street segments that account for 50% of crime for each crime type and the  number of street segments that account for 5% of all street segments. These values are used  in the calculation of the metrics in Table 2.

|Table 2Crime concentration metrics, Vancouver 2024|Table 2Crime concentration metrics, Vancouver 2024|Table 2Crime concentration metrics, Vancouver 2024|Table 2Crime concentration metrics, Vancouver 2024|Table 2Crime concentration metrics, Vancouver 2024|Table 2Crime concentration metrics, Vancouver 2024|Table 2Crime concentration metrics, Vancouver 2024|Table 2Crime concentration metrics, Vancouver 2024|Table 2Crime concentration metrics, Vancouver 2024|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Crime Type|50-X  (Weisburd)|5-X (Hipp-Kim)|Adjusted 50-X  (Andresen-Malleson)|Gini  (Bernasco-Steenbeek)|Generalized  Gini|Concentration  expected|Marginal  (Chalfin et al.)|Generalized  50-X|
|Theft of vehicle|1.9|100|44.31|0.96|0.19|1.98|0.08|39.78|
|Theft of bicycle|1.4|100|28.42|0.96|0.48|2.79|1.39|19.83|
|Burglary, Residential|2.35|86.16|39.09|0.95|0.31|2.89|0.54|32.05|
|Burglary, Commercial|1.57|88.84|25.78|0.96|0.57|3.74|2.17|15.97|
|Mischief|2.27|66.02|12.99|0.91|0.78|11.42|9.15|5.53|
|Theft from vehicle|2.89|59.98|13.69|0.89|0.75|12.19|9.3|6.44|
|Theft|0.4|83.56|2.11|0.95|0.95|20.02|19.62|0.4|
|Property crime, total|1.69|66.01|4.07|0.87|0.87|30.16|28.47|1.69|


The  various  crime  concentration  metrics  for  Vancouver  property  crime  in  2024  are  shown in Table 2, with all percentages ranging from 0 to 100. It is instructive to start with  total property crime and theft because these crimes do not include the bias of the number  of crimes being small than the number of streets and, accordingly, the Generalized coefficients provide the same outcomes as those not adjusted. In this case, it is clear that crime  is very concentrated at place, whichever metric is used. The 50-X metric shows that 50%  of crime is found at 1.7% of streets for property crime, and only 0.4% of streets for thefts.  The Adjusted 50-X metric, as expected, underestimates street wide concentration showing  half as much concentration for property crime and about one fifth as much concentration  for theft. Nonetheless, it is instructive that concentration is also high looking at only streets  with any crime. The Gini coefficient also shows strong concentration, with a coefficient of  0.87 for property crime and a coefficient of 0.95 for theft, suggesting concentration is not  an artifact of the 50% criterion, but rather is a result of concentration across the crime distribution at places. One limitation of the Gini coefficient is that its interpretation regarding  concentration is not clear, though O’Brien (2019) suggests that a Gini coefficient of over  0.50 reflects strong concentration.

The 5-X distribution also reflects concentration, but as we noted earlier, it attributes  larger variability to relatively smaller levels of concentration. For example, the difference of  0.4 to 1.69% becomes 66 to 84%. Looking at the table overall, when the number of crimes  increases (from top to bottom of the table), the 5-X metric does tend closer to 50%, mirroring the 50-X metric. However, there is a lot of variation across the 5-X metric that isn’t  always instructive. For example, residential burglary and theft of bicycle have similar crime  counts (both approximately 900) but their 5-X values are 86 and 100, respectively. Though  one could argue that the 5-X metric provides more information because theft of bicycle is  more concentrated and 5% of the street segments account for 100% of the number of crimes,  but all bicycle thefts occur on fewer than 5% of street segments so even though this crime  type appears to be highly concentrated it may actually have a uniform distribution across the  places in which it does occur.

Simply put, in the context of highly concentrated crime, because of fewer crimes than  places or not, the 5-X metric cannot differentiate between different levels of actual concentration—theft of vehicle and theft of bicycle have the same 5-X metric value despite having  different levels of crime concentration. This simply shows the limitation in the application  of the 5-X metric when there are fewer crimes than places. And the difficulty here is that  there is no obvious way to adjust for this situation that is quite common for specific crimes  in crime and place research studies. Having said that, it is important to note that this metric  emphasizes that there is important variation in crime concentrations in cities, particularly  when that crime is highly concentrated.

The adjustment to the 50-X metric introduced by Andresen and Malleson (2011) does  control for the situation when there are fewer crimes than places and is evident in the metric  shown in Table 2. As expected, the percentages of street segments shown to account for 50%  of crime are notably greater than the 50-X metric. This adjustment is particularly important  when the number of streets is greater than the number of crimes (e.g. theft of vehicle and  theft of bicycle), which is illustrated below when we discuss the adjusted metrics. But it is  important to note that more generally these smaller values can be due to the actual uniformity of the distribution of crime in streets with little crime, or the inflation that comes when  counting only streets with crime. We emphasize again that adjusted 50-X is telling us the  concentration of crime across streets with any crime, and is not considering the concentration of crime across all streets.

The Gini coefficients (standard and generalized) provide similar information as the 50-X  metric and the adjusted 50-X metric just discussed—our code using the R package developed by Bernasco and Steenbeek (2017) is in the appendix. All of the Gini coefficients  are quite close to unity, indicating a high degree of concentration, much like the original  50-X metric. This is problematic, however, because the Gini coefficient cannot differentiate  degrees of concentration well when there are fewer crimes than places, as noted by Bernasco and Steenbeek (2017).

The generalized Gini coefficients provide much more information, being the same for  theft and total property crime because there are more events than places, but notable differentiation for the other crime types. Specifically, residential burglary and theft of vehicle  show the lowest values for the Gini coefficients with theft of vehicle being the most uniformly distributed.

For the marginal crime concentration index, we generate random concentrations here,  with the R code for doing so presented in an appendix. Similar to that shown by Chalfin  et al. (2021), when the number of events is close to the number of places (theft in the current example), the expected concentration is 20%: 50% of crime is accounted for in 20%  of places under randomness (with replacement so that the same place can have multiple  events). This level of concentration lessens and approaches 50% when the number of events  increases (total property crime), but increases (approaches zero) when the number of events  decreases (theft of vehicle, for example). This led to Chalfin et al. (2021) proposing the  marginal crime concentration metric that subtracts the concentration found in the 50-X metric from the expected concentration level under randomness: larger values of the marginal  crime concentration metric indicate greater levels of concentration.

We can see this in Table 2 with theft and total property crime have the largest values  for the marginal crime concentration metric, consistent with the findings of Chalfin et al.  (2021). Most importantly, the concentration of criminal events under randomness using the  number of criminal events by crime type is quite high, particularly when the crime count  is low, as would be expected—our code for these values is in the appendix. The marginal  crime concentration metrics for the various crime types, not surprisingly, have the greatest  values for theft, theft from vehicle, and total property crime, with low magnitude values  for those crime types with low crime counts. At first sight, this appears to be a good metric for measuring crime concentrations, and it is. The difficulty with it, however, is in two  dimensions.

First, there is not an obvious interpretation. This is partially due to this metric measuring absolute change; the marginal crime concentration metric could have a moderately low  value, indicating not a lot of concentration, when that change may be more meaningful  when considering relative change. This is easily fixed with the following modification:

rmcckijt = ( cckijt − cckijt∗ )/cckijt , (5)

making it a relative marginal crime concentration metric, rather than absolute, with the deviation from randomness being relative to expected level of concentration under randomness.

|Table 3 Crime concentration metrics, nonparametric (Spearman) correlations|Table 3 Crime concentration metrics, nonparametric (Spearman) correlations|Table 3 Crime concentration metrics, nonparametric (Spearman) correlations|Table 3 Crime concentration metrics, nonparametric (Spearman) correlations|Table 3 Crime concentration metrics, nonparametric (Spearman) correlations|Table 3 Crime concentration metrics, nonparametric (Spearman) correlations|Table 3 Crime concentration metrics, nonparametric (Spearman) correlations|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| |50-X  (Weisburd)|5-X  (Hipp-Kim)|Adjusted  50-X  (Andresen  - Malleson)|Gini  (Bernasco  - Steenbeek)|Generalized Gini|Marginal  (Chalfin  et al.)|
|50-X (Weisburd)| | | | | | |
|5-X (Hipp-Kim)|−0.443| | | | | |
|Adjusted 50-X  (Andresen-Malleson)|0.31|0.695| | | | |
|Gini (Bernasco-Steenbeek)|−0.524|0.946|0.571| | | |
|Generalized Gini|−0.31|−0.695|−1.0|−0.571| | |
|Marginal (Chalfin et al.)|−0.19|−0.790|−0.952|−0.69|0.952| |
|Generalized 50-X|0.31|0.695|1.0|0.571|−1.0|−0.952|


The second dimension is that the calculation of this metric requires a simulation exercise  that not all researchers and analysts may have the necessary background to undertake easily.  We provide our code below, but this adds an additional complexity to the calculation of the  marginal crime concentration metric.

Turning to our new generalized 50-X metric, it has smaller values than the adjusted 50-X  metric when the number of crimes is smaller than the number of streets because it accounts  for how dispersed the criminal events could be rather than how dispersed they are. This  more conservative estimate is important because it corrects for overestimation of concentration. The correction is greatest in cases where the number of events relative to streets is  smallest, and in the case of theft of vehicle and theft of bicycle the adjustment illustrates  greater concentration than the adjusted 50-X coefficient developed by Andresen and Malleson (2011), and provides in our view a more accurate assessment of the “real” level of crime  concentration. In turn, it also adjusts for the everyday understanding of crime concentrations  in a more intuitive way than the generalized Gini coefficient. For example, the generalized  Gini coefficient for theft of vehicle would lead to a view that there is little concentration of  this type of crime. But the generalized 50-X metric suggests that 50% of crime is found at  about 40% of places. Still evidence of concentration, while likely not enough to generate a  crime hot spots approach to prevention.

Lastly, as a method to compare the different crime concentration metric, we present a  Spearman’s correlation matrix of all the metrics in Table 3. We use Spearman’s correlation  because of the small sample size. It is important to note that because there are only 7 metrics/observations, that the threshold for statistical significance is quite high. If we solve the  t-statistic formula for the Spearman correlation coefficient, rs, we get:

rs = t / √ (n − 2 + t2) (6)

At a 5% significance level, we would require a correlation coefficient greater than 0.75 for  statistical significance. As such, it is important to consider the magnitude of the coefficients,  not just the statistical significance.

The 7 observations are one for each of the concentration metrics. As such we are comparing the global metrics with each other in order to identify if they are measure similar concepts. The original 50-X metric is not significantly related to any of the alternative metrics,  but has moderately strong relationships with the 5-X metric and the Gini coefficient. The  5-X metric is significantly related to the Gini index and (negatively) to the marginal crime  concentration metric, with strong relationships with all metrics. The adjusted 50-X metric  is significantly related to the generalized Gini, the marginal crime concentration metric, and  the generalized 50-X metric, also with strong relationships with all metrics. And the marginal crime concentration metric is significantly related to the generalized 50-X metric, with  strong relationships with all metrics except the 50-X metric.

As noted above, the metrics that have the easiest/best interpretations and account for  the situation when the number of events is less than the number of places is the adjusted  50-X metric, the generalized Gini coefficient, the marginal crime concentration metric, and  the generalized 50-X metric. All four of these metrics are highly correlated, indicating that  they capture the same information. However, the adjusted 50-X metric does not properly  account for the potential distribution of criminal events, only where the criminal events  actually occur, whereas the generalized Gini and the marginal crime concentration metrics  are more complex to calculate. Moreover, Spearman’s correlation uses the rank of the values  for each of the observation, so the “perfect” correlations here reflect similar rankings and  do not correspond to the variance of one metric being captured completely by the other. In  other words, they do not necessarily capture the same phenomena and the limitations of one  do not correspond to the limitations of the other. This leaves the generalized 50-X metric  that has ease of interpretation, a simple calculation, and accounts for situations in which the  number of criminal events is less than the number of places.

We noted at the outset the importance of Ockham’s razor in choosing a metric for assessing  crime concentration. This approach emphasizes the importance of leaning towards more  parsimonious and easier to interpret approaches, within the context of answering the question that the researcher or practitioner is asking. As noted above, this an important issue for  the crime and place literature, particularly for the spatial modelling of crime concentration  from a theoretical and a practical perspective. We began by arguing that the different metrics  used to measure crime concentration are to a great extent telling different stories about the  concentration of crime in cities. We have argued that the 50-X metric provides the simplest  and most direct measure for assessing how concentrated crime is at specific places, or where  the majority (50%) of crimes are occurring. It is well fit to the approach of identifying and  preventing crime at crime hot spots. The 5-X metric, on the other hand, focuses on locating the top 5% of streets with the highest crime levels, irrespective of proportion of crime  found on those streets. One may argue, based on these differences, that a key question for  researchers and practitioners is which metric is best for addressing specific crime issues.  We are confident that the 50-X metric has an advantage over the 5-X measure presented by  Hipp and Kim (2017) in that it is examining how much concentration exists, and focuses  on the distribution of cases with the highest number of events (the X percent of streets that  produce 50% of crime). We also noted that the Hipp and Kim measure is highly sensitive  to small changes in the distribution of crime events, and illustrated that with empirical data.  In fact, in these cases, we have shown that this can include all places where crime occurs.  It certainly is the case that Hipp and Kim’s (2017) and Lee et al.’s (2017) challenge to the  consistency of strong crime concentration is in good part due to their inverting the 50-X  approach.

Conclusions

We also argued that the adjusted 50-X approach suggested by Andresen and Malleson  (2011) does not provide a general portrait of crime concentration across the city, but rather  a portrait of crime concentration within those places with any crime. This metric provides  lower levels of crime concentration precisely because it is examining concentration among  crime places. Since 100% of crime occurs in 30 to 60% of cities (Zastrow 2024), this metric  ignores the degree of absolute concentration of crime across the city. At the same time, it  presents useful information about how concentrated crime is within the population of streets  without crime. In our view, this is an important piece of information, but is most useful  when considered along with the general 50-X metric.

In this context, the Gini coefficient also provides important information for understanding levels of crime concentration. It measures crime concentration across the full distribution of events, and provides a straightforward way to compare cities in terms of crime  concentration. But it does not directly examine the extremes of the distribution, which are  most important when considering public policies focused in on hot spots of crime. Moreover, using the approach of Ockham’s razor the Gini coefficient adds significant complexity to how to understand crime concentrations. What is big and what is small? There is no  simple way to answer this question and, again, this would suggest that the 50-X metric has  the benefit of easy interpretation both by researchers and policy makers (Chalfin et al. 2021).

While the 50-X approach meets the criterion of Ockham’s razor, as we noted above, it  becomes biased as the number of crime events becomes smaller than the number of geographic units examined. We illustrated this as well using empirical data. Relying on the  approach used in the generalized Gini coefficient, we developed a generalized 50-X metric  that does not evidence this bias. We are confident that this measure should be the preferred  measure for estimating crime concentrations with a goal of illustrating the extent that crime  concentrates in crime hot spots. But we also advise that the adjusted 50-X metric and the  generalized Gini coefficient provide important information more generally about how crime  distributes across place in a city.

Finally, it is important to restate that all measures of crime concentration have limitations. Primarily, they do not allow for the testing of temporal stability or spatial clustering.  Temporal stability refers to knowing if the same street segments are hotspots and spatial  clustering refers to if high-crime micro-places are clustered in the same places: the ability to  assess city-level change in the geographic structure of crime. As noted above, testing these  aspects of crime patterns are best undertaken using group-based trajectory modeling or local  spatial statistics (Andresen et al. 2017a, b); Anselin 1995; Curman et al. 2015; Weisburd  et al. 2004, 2012). Additionally, it is also possible to calculate neighbourhood level crime  concentration metrics to identify levels of crime concentration within subareas of the city  (O’Brien 2019; O’Brien et al., 2022). However, the global measures of crime concentration  discussed here, particularly the generalized 50-X metric, are instructive to first identify concentration at the level of the city and, possibly, to calculate local level concentration metrics  to identify more local level concentrations and their stability over time. These metrics can  then be used to justify further investigations into local patterns of crime concentration using  local spatial statistics and other techniques that allow for modeling such patterns.

Appendix. Gini coefficients, Marginal Crime Concentrations and R Code

References

Andresen MA, Hodgkinson T (2023) In a world called catastrophe: the impact of COVID-19 on neighbourhood level crime in Vancouver, Canada. J Exp Criminol 19(2):487–511

Andresen MA, Hodgkinson T (2025) Il y a quelque chose sur la carte: a modern spatial analysis of crime in  early 19th century France. Am JCrim Justice. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12103-025-09798-8

Andresen MA, Jenion GW (2008) Crimeprevention and the science of where people are. Crim Justice Policy  Rev 19(2):164–180

Andresen MA, Linning SJ (2012) The (in)appropriateness of aggregating across crime types. Appl Geogr  35(1–2):275–282

Andresen MA, Malleson N (2011) Testing the stability of crime patterns: implications for theory and policy.  J Res Crime Delinq 48(1):58–82

Andresen MA, Linning SJ, Malleson N (2017a) Crime at places and spatial concentrations: exploring the  spatial stability of property crime in Vancouver BC, 2003–2013. J QuantCriminol 33(2):255–275

Andresen MA, Curman ASN, Linning SJ (2017b) The trajectories of crime at places: understanding the patterns of disaggregated crime types. J Quant Criminol 33(3):427–449

Anselin L (1995) Local indicators of spatial association—LISA. Geogr Anal 27(2):93–115

Bernasco W, Steenbeek W (2017) More places than crimes: implications for evaluating the law of crime  concentration at place. J Quant Criminol 33(3):451–467

Boggs SL (1965) Urban crime patterns. Am Sociol Rev 30(6):899–908

Braga AA, Weisburd DL (2022) Does hot spots policing have meaningful impacts on crime? Findings from  an alternative approach to estimating effect sizes from place-based program evaluations. J Quant Criminol 38(1):1–22

Braga AA, Turchan BS, Papachristos AV, Hureau DM (2019) Hot spots policing and crime reduction: an  update of an ongoing systematic review and meta-analysis. J Exp Criminol 15(3):289–311

Chalfin A, Kaplan J, Cuellar M (2021) Measuring marginal crime concentration: a new solution to an old  problem. J Res Crime Delinq 58(4):467–504

Curiel RP, Bishop SR (2016) A measure of the concentration of rare events. SciRep 6:32369

Curiel RP, Delmar SC, Bishop SR (2018) Measuring the distribution of crime and its concentration. J Quant  Criminol 34:775–803

Curman ASN, Andresen MA, Brantingham PJ (2015) Crime and place: A longitudinal examination of street  segment patterns in Vancouver, BC. J Quant Criminol 31(1):127–147

Farrell G, Tilley N, Tseloni A, Mailley J (2014) Why the crime drop? Crime Justice 43(1):421–490

Farrell G, Hodgkinson T, Andresen MA (2018) Homicide in Canada and the crime drop. Crim Sci 7:1

Franklin J (2001) The science of conjecture: Evidence and probability before Pascal. Johns Hopkins University Press

Groff ER, Weisburd D, Yang S-M (2010) Is it important to examine crime trends at a local “micro” level?  A longitudinal analysis of street to street variability in crime trajectories. J Quant Criminol 26(1):7–32

Hipp JR, Kim Y-A (2017) Measuring crime concentration across cities of varying sizes: Complications based  on the spatial and temporal scale employed. J Quant Criminol 33(3):595–632

Hodgkinson T, Andresen MA (2020) Show me a man or a woman alone and I’ll show you a saint: Changes in  the frequency of criminal incidents during the COVID-19 pandemic. JCrimJustice 69:101706

Lee Y, Eck JE O S, Martinez NN (2017) How concentrated is crime at places? A systematic review from 1970  to 2015. Crime Sci 6:6

Levin A, Rosenfeld R, Deckard M (2017) The law of crime concentration: an application andrecommendations for future research. J Quant Criminol 33(3):635–647

Mohler G, Brantingham PJ, Carter J, Short MB (2019) Reducing bias in estimates for the law of crime concentration. J Quant Criminolo 35(4):747–765

Nivette AE, Zahnow R, Aguilar R, Ahven A, Amram S, Ariel B, Eisner MP (2021) A global analysis of the  impact of COVID-19 stay-at-home restrictions on crime. Nat Hum Behav 5(7):868–877

O’Brien DT, Ciomek A, Tucker R (2022) How and why is crime more concentrated in someneighborhoods  than others? A new dimension to community crime. J Quant Criminol 38(2):295–321

O’Brien DT (2019) The action is everywhere, but greater at more localized spatial scales: Comparing concentrations of crime across addresses, streets, and neighborhoods. J Res Crim Delinq 56(3):339–377

Pareto V (1896) Cours d’Économie politique. F. Rouge, Lausanne

Quetelet A (1831) Research on the propensity to crime of different ages. Hayez

Rogerson  PA  (2013)  The  Gini  coefficient  of  inequality:  a  new  interpretation.  Lett  Spatial  Resour  Sci  6:109–120

Schaffer J (2015) What not to multiply without necessity. Australas J Philos 93(4):644–664

Weisburd D (2015) The law of crimeconcentration and the criminology of place. Criminology 53(2):133–157

Weisburd D, Bushway S, Lum C, Yang SM (2004) Trajectories of crime at places: a longitudinal study of  street segments in the city of Seattle. Criminology 42(2):283–321

Weisburd, D., Bruinsma, G.J.N, & Bernasco, W. (2009). Units of analysis in geographic criminology: Historical development, critical issues, and open questions. In: Weisburd D, Bernasco W, Bruinsma GJN  (eds). Putting crime in its place: Units of analysis in geographic criminology (pp. 3 – 31). Springer

Weisburd D, Groff ER, Yang SM (2012) The criminology of place: Street segments and our understanding of  the crime problem. Oxford University Press.

Weisburd D, Zastrow T, Kuen K, Andresen MA (2024) Crime concentrations at micro place: A review of the  evidence. Aggress Violent Behav 78:101979

Wolfgang ME, Figlio RM, Sellin T (1972) Delinquency in a birth cohort. University of Chicago Press

Zastrow TN (2024) Is there a law of crime concentration for most crime in a city? A multi-city study. [Doctoral dissertation, George Mason University]. h t t p s : / / m a r s . g m u . e d u / b i t s t r e a m s / f b b c 0 a 3 a - 4 4 7 a - 4 b 3 3 - a b  d 6 - 4 6 e 1 4 8 3 b d 8 6 4 / d o w n l o a d

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and  institutional affiliations.

Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a  publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.

Authors and Affiliations

Martin A. Andresen1  · David Weisburd2,3

- Martin A. Andresen


martin.andresen@gmail.com

David Weisburd

dweisbur@gmu.edu

1 School of Criminology, Simon Fraser University, 8888 University Drive, Burnaby V5A 1S6,  BC, Canada

2 Department of Criminology, Law and Society, George Mason University, 4400 University  Drive, Fairfax MS 6D12, VA, USA

3 Institute of Criminology, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Mt. Scopus, Jerusalem   91905, Israel

