J Quant Criminol (2017) 33:595–632 DOI 10.1007/s10940-016-9328-3

ORIGINAL PAPER

Measuring Crime Concentration Across Cities of Varying Sizes: Complications Based on the Spatial and Temporal Scale Employed

John R. Hipp1 • Young-An Kim2

Published online: 1 November 2016 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2016

Abstract

Objectives We argue that assessing the level of crime concentration across cities has four challenges: (1) how much variability should we expect to observe; (2) whether concentration should be measured across different types of macro units of different sizes; (3) a statistical challenge for measuring crime concentration; (4) the temporal assumption employed when measuring high crime locations.

Methods We use data for 42 cities in southern California with at least 40,000 population to assess the level of crime concentration in them for ﬁve different Part 1 crimes and total Part 1 crimes over 2005–2012. We demonstrate that the traditional measure of crime concentration is confounded by crimes that may simply spatially locate due to random chance. We also use two measures employing different temporal assumptions: a historically adjusted crime concentration measure, and a temporally adjusted crime concentration measure (a novel approximate solution that is simple for researchers to implement). Results There is much variability in crime concentration over cities in the top 5 % of street segments. The standard deviation across cities over years for the temporally adjusted crime concentration measure is between 10 and 20 % across crime types (with the average range typically being about 15–90 %). The historically adjusted concentration has similar variability and typically ranges from about 35 to 100 %.

Conclusions The study provides evidence of variability in the level of crime concentration across cities, but also raises important questions about the temporal scale when measuring this concentration. The results open an exciting new area of research exploring why levels of crime concentration may vary over cities? Either micro- or macro- theories may help researchers in exploring this new direction.

Keywords Neighborhoods Crime Aggregation Imputation

& John R. Hipp john.hipp@UCI.edu

- 1 Department of Criminology, Law and Society and Department of Sociology, University of California, 3311 Social Ecology II, Irvine, CA 92697, USA
- 2 Department of Criminology, Law and Society, University of California Irvine, Irvine, USA


Scholars have long noted that crime tends to concentrate at various locations within cities,

- as the tendency of crime to concentrate spatially was observed nearly 200 years ago in Paris, France by Quetelet (1969 (1842)). This concentration tendency is repeatedly observed even as researchers use ever smaller geographic units for aggregating crime counts: from neighborhoods to various census units, down to street segments or even parcels. A question then is whether the level of crime concentration varies over cities? A small, but growing, number of recent studies have detected relatively similar levels of concentration across cities, spurring Weisburd et al. (2012) to propose a ‘‘law of crime concentration’’ in which it is proposed that ‘‘for a deﬁned measure of crime at a speciﬁc microgeographic unit, the concentration of crime will fall within a narrow bandwidth of percentages for a deﬁned cumulative proportion of crime’’ (Weisburd 2015). This was a bold proposal put forth by these authors, and was echoed in Weisburd’s Sutherland speech in 2014 (Weisburd 2015).

The question of how similar the level of crime concentration is across cities poses

- at least four challenges for researchers. First, there is no agreement regarding how similar the level of concentration should be across cities to be termed ‘‘similar’’. For example, the law of crime concentration states that ‘‘…the concentration of crime will fall within a narrow bandwidth of percentages for a deﬁned cumulative proportion of crime’’ (Weisburd 2015); yet it is never speciﬁed anywhere how narrow this bandwidth must be. Thus, evidence is necessary for the width of this bandwidth. A second question is whether the level of concentration should be compared across cities of different sizes, and/or for different deﬁnitions of crime. This raises scope conditions of the proper geographic units when comparing levels of crime concentration, and relates directly to the third issue. The third challenge for assessing crime concentration is a statistical one: simply by random chance a certain amount of crime concentration will be observed in cities. As we will highlight below, the amount will vary over cities, and to some extent it will vary in systematic ways that pose a problem for one technique researchers use to measure the level of crime concentration. We will propose one solution to this challenge, but this raises a fourth issue: how should we measure crime concentration to assess differences across cities? Different measures can be used depending on the temporal assumptions about the stability of crime concentration that the researcher is willing to make, which can have theoretical and empirical implications. This is particularly important when comparing different-sized cities or relatively rare crime types.


Given the need for more robust empirical evidence regarding how consistently crime concentrates across cities, we will provide that here by using data for 42 cities in southern California with at least 40,000 population over an eight year period (2005–2012) to explore the level of crime concentration in these cities. We will use three different measures that make different temporal assumptions about the stability of crime concentration, and the differences in the results we obtain across these measures highlight that this is an issue that researchers need to explicitly consider. We will orient our literature review around the proposed Law of crime concentration, as this is the clearest statement on the possible level of crime concentration across cities. We will highlight that there are some intriguing macro theoretical implications if a law of crime concentration is true that deserve consideration. Conversely, there are also interesting theoretical issues if there is in fact variability across cities in the level of crime concentration.

Literature Review

Proper Macro-Units of Analysis?

The law of crime concentration proposes that ‘‘for a deﬁned measure of crime at a speciﬁc microgeographic unit, the concentration of crime will fall within a narrow bandwidth of percentages for a deﬁned cumulative proportion of crime’’ (Weisburd 2015). There is some uncertainty around this deﬁnition. We acknowledge one view is that a law in the social sciences should not be held to the same standards as a law in the physical sciences. For example, Tobler’s First Law of Geography that ‘‘everything is related to everything else, but near things are more related than distant things’’ is quite vague. We nonetheless believe a careful consideration of issues regarding measuring crime concentration is warranted regardless of one’s view of the efﬁcacy of this as a ‘‘Law’’. First, how narrow must a ‘‘narrow bandwidth’’ be? Second, although the law is clear in focusing on any ‘‘deﬁned measure of crime,’’ early work on crime concentration often combined all calls for service into a single measure, which may lead some to presume that it only applies to speciﬁc aggregations of crime. Some recent work has disaggregated by types of crime (Andresen et al. 2016), although it is unclear whether we should expect to observe similar levels of crime concentration across cities for various crime types.

Third, whereas the law speciﬁcally allows for different microgeographic units, it is not speciﬁed which larger aggregate unit these smaller units should be aggregated into. In the nascent existing research, scholars typically use a city as the larger unit, and often use extremely large cities (Weisburd et al. 2012; Weisburd 2015). Will the law hold for all cities, regardless of their size? Or is it only appropriate for very large cities? Furthermore, given that cities are municipal units with politically-deﬁned boundaries, is this really the appropriate unit? City boundaries are somewhat arbitrary, can change over time, and arguably do not really deﬁne residents’ behavioral patterns. That is, residents often cross city boundaries to work, shop, form friendships, and perhaps even commit crimes. Given all this, are politically deﬁned cities truly the proper larger unit for such comparisons? For example, perhaps some speciﬁc distance more appropriately characterizes the macro environment of interest, as suggested by Hipp and Roussell (2013) in their study of the principles of population size and density. Given that the proposed law was formulated based on evidence from research using cities as the larger unit, we will assume that cities are indeed the proper unit and not explore this issue any further here. We simply raise this here as an issue for future consideration in measuring concentration.

Proper Micro-Units of Analysis?

We brieﬂy note that an apparent strength of the proposed law of crime concentrations is that if we use different micro-geographic units we should still expect to obtain results of crime concentration within some small range of values. This is a surprisingly strong claim from a theoretical point of view that is underappreciated, as it proposes that whatever concentration is observed at one level of granularity will be observed at higher levels (albeit with a uniformly lower value of concentration). If true, an implication is that although there is variability across the blocks within larger units, crime will aggregate up in a particularly systematic way such that the level of crime concentration for the larger units will be a ratio of that in the smaller units. This implies that there is some unseen larger force that is binding the level of concentration from the smaller units to the larger

units. This implies a particularly complicated process, if the law of crime concentration is true. Given that much of the crime and place literature focuses exclusively on crime within small units of analysis based on the argument that there is considerable variability of crime over small units nested within larger units, this possibility implies a systematic relationship between crime in small units and crime in the larger nesting units. We do not explore this further here, but simply highlight that this is an interesting theoretical implication that has not been given adequate consideration.

Empirical Evidence of Crime Concentration?

At this point, there is only a small, but growing, body of evidence regarding crime concentration across cities (Braga et al. 2010; Curman et al. 2014; Eck et al. 2000; Groff et al. 2010; Sherman et al. 1989; Sherman 1995; Spelman 1995; Weisburd and Amram 2014; Weisburd et al. 2004, 2012; Weisburd and Mazerolle 2000). For example, Sherman et al. (1989) found that about 50 % of crime calls were attributed to 3.5 % of the addresses in Minneapolis in a single year. Likewise, Spelman (1995) found that the worst 10 % of public spaces (high schools, subway stations, public housing projects, and parks) accounted for 50 % of crime calls. Weisburd and Mazerolle (2000) found that just 5 % of the streets in Jersey City showed evidence of drug activity, and the majority of the city was free of drug activity. In a study using crime calls at addresses in the Bronx and Baltimore, Eck et al. (2000) found that 10 % of places produced 32 % of crime. In their study on gun violence in Boston between 1980 and 2008, Braga et al. (2010) found that less than 3 % of street segments and intersections produced more than half of incidents of gun violence.

Studies conducted in Seattle by Weisburd et al. (2004, 2012) conﬁrmed crime concentration at the street segment level and its stability over time. For instance, Weisburd et al. (2004) found that 50 % of calls for service over 14 year period (1989–2002) are attributable to only 4.5 % of the street segments in Seattle. Curman et al. (2014) replicated Weisburd and colleagues studies by examining calls for service in Vancouver, BC, Canada. They found that 60 % of calls are concentrated at 7.8 % of street segments and this concentration is stable across time. Although there is evidence of a degree of concentration, more research is necessary. Furthermore, there are statistical issues when assessing crime concentration, to which we turn next.

Statistical Challenges to Measuring Crime Concentration

One fundamental challenge to comparing the level of crime concentration across cities is a statistical problem: by random chance we will always observe a certain amount of concentration of crime based on the typical measure used. In this manuscript, for brevity we will focus on the amount of crime that concentrates in the top 5 % of segments in a city; nonetheless, the logic of what we consider here extends to other chosen values (e.g., 1, 2 %, etc.). If crime events occurred in a completely random spatial pattern, then if we were to choose at random 5 % of the segments in a city we would expect to observe 5 % of the crime events; however, the challenge here is more problematic given how the level of crime concentration is assessed. When assessing the crime concentration, the segments of a city are sorted from highest to lowest based on number of crime events and therefore the expected count is in fact the tail of a Poisson distribution based on the number of crime counts in the city and the number of segments. Although it is straightforward to compute

the expected counts of crime events in these most extreme segments, most existing research in this nascent literature does not account for this (for an exception, see Levin et al. 2015).

This statistical problem is enhanced in cities with relatively low crime levels. In fact, in the extreme case of a city with relatively few crime events 100 % of crime events will always be observed in 5 % of the segments (even with spatial randomness). As an example, consider a city with 100 segments and in which just 5 crime events were observed in the prior year. In this case, even if the crime events are completely random, at most we will observe only 5 segments experience crime events, and therefore 5 % of the segments in the city will contain 100 % of the crime events. This is, of course, an extreme case. However, an important insight is that as cities approach particularly low numbers of crime events, concentration will be observed even if there is random placement of crime events. This insight has not to this point been appropriately appreciated in the literature, and has consequences when studying cities from a wide spectrum of sizes and crime levels, as we will explore later in this manuscript.

To address this statistical problem, one possible solution is to compare the concentration level observed in the city with what would be observed assuming spatial randomness of crimes in segments in the city.1 But what do we do next with this information? One possibility would be to assess whether the level of crime concentration in a city is statistically different than that expected by chance. To do this, one would generate the expected number of crime events in the top 5 % of segments in a city based on the number of crime events and the number of segments in the city (assuming random locations of crime events) as a Monte Carlo simulation. One could then assess where the observed number of crime events in the top 5 % of segments in the city lies on this distribution, and determine if the observed concentration is greater than expected based on chance. However, this is a very weak test as the notion that crime tends to concentrate spatially is relatively well-known, and furthermore we are most interested in comparing across cities the level of concentration of crime.

Given that we are not interested in simply assessing whether the observed concentration of crime is signiﬁcantly different than chance, another approach would be to compute the mean and standard deviation of this same Monte Carlo simulation of expected values of crime in segments based on random chance to compute the z-score of the observed level of crime concentration in the city. While this has a certain appeal of assessing how different the observed concentration is than chance, a limitation is that z-scores will necessarily be much larger in a city with more crime events and therefore have a tighter distribution around the random counts. In low crime cities, the distribution will be much wider, and the mean plus the standard deviation may even include 100 %, or at least be close. In low crime cities, therefore, it would not be possible to obtain a high z-score on the observed crime concentration simply because there is too much uncertainty to assess the level of crime concentration. It therefore may or may not be desirable to capture this precision in the measure that captures the amount of concentration in the city. This approach also has the limitation of not allowing assessments of the level of crime concentration across cities.

- 1 This spatial randomness assumption is used to construct an appropriate baseline measure; for a discussion of proper baselines, see (Hipp et al. 2011). And this is consonant with the approach in the literature of assessing the level of crime concentration in cities regardless of the characteristics of smaller geographic units.


These considerations suggest the need to distinguish between the true amount of crime concentration in a city, and the amount observed simply due to random chance. The problem is that the traditional approach to measuring crime concentration conﬂates these two constructs. The challenge then is to disentangle these two constructs given that we are interested in measuring the true amount of crime concentration. If one instead presumes that the observed level of concentration will be the same across cities—and thus cities will have different mixes of true concentration and that due to random change—then the law of crime concentration would need a deﬁnition that includes both (1) a true concentration component as well as (2) a statistical chance component. We do not pursue this further given that we are skeptical of the theoretical utility of pursuing this direction, and argue that it is more appropriate to only measure the ‘‘true’’ level of concentration after accounting for this statistical randomness.

Given the challenge of how to account for the random probability that a certain amount of crime will appear concentrated in a small subset of segments, we propose a simpler solution here that is very easy for researchers to implement and raises the issue of temporal stability in crime concentration. There is always an implicit temporal component to crime concentration: at a minimum, scholars often impose a 1-year stability assumption in counting up the number of crime events that occurred during a particular year and then computing the level of concentration. The crime hot spot literature emphasizes the stability of crime locations, although the temporal period can be identiﬁed as a period anywhere from less than a year to much longer than a year (Gorr and Lee 2014; Grubesic and Mack 2008). In our approach we focus on the common longer-term stability, which is what Weisburd et al. (2012) noted in their longitudinal study of Seattle street segments. If it wasn’t the case that crime generally concentrated in the same segments over repeated time points, this would require a particularly complicated theory to explain why cities not only have the same level of crime concentration over time, but that the crime shifts around to different street segments from year to year. The empirical evidence in general does not support this, and we are aware of no theories positing such a complicated process.

Our solution to account for the randomness of crime location therefore ﬁrst sorts segments based on level of crime in the prior year, and then computes the proportion of crime that these segments account for in the current year. We refer to this as temporally adjusted crime concentration, and argue that this is a reasonable approximation of the amount of crime concentration in a city that to some extent gets around the random probability problem. We emphasize that this is an approximation, as it is not entirely correct for two reasons: (1) in any given year, there can be certain segments that are not true ‘‘high crime’’ segments, but will simply appear in the top segments because of an increased crime count because of the stochastic nature of crime events; (2) in the following year, although we expect most segments to still be among the highest crime segments, a certain small percentage may legitimately stop being among the highest crime segments. Our approach will inadvertently include these two types of segments as those expected to be among the highest crime segments in a given year. This is not terribly problematic because we argue that: (1) in any given year, such segments should constitute a very small percentage of the highest crime segments (based on the hot spot logic articulated earlier); (2) we have no reason to expect that the number of segments of these two types would differ considerably over cities, and therefore our estimate of the level of crime concentration would be uniformly modestly underestimated across all cities; this would still allow us to compare whether the level of concentration is the same across cities. As a sidenote, we point out that if assumption #2 varies across cities, this would imply a need for theorizing why some

cities have many more segments that are ceasing to be high crime segments from year to year compared to other cities.2 Presumably, this theory would either: (1) propose structural or cultural characteristics of a city that lead to a constant state of such ﬂux; or (2) propose why a city is undergoing a structural or cultural change at one point in time that leads to a short-term period in which the location of crime concentration changes. This would almost certainly require macro-level theorizing to explain either of these scenarios.3

We note that another approach existing in the literature to assess the level of crime concentration at least implicitly addresses this randomness of crime events by utilizing a group based modeling approach (Curman et al. 2014; Weisburd et al. 2004). This strategy uses data from a particular city over a number of years and latent groups are detected that have distinct crime patterns over time (Muthe´n and Muthe´n 2000; Nagin 1999). The researcher can then select the group(s) with consistently high crime counts over time. This descriptive approach shows the percentage of crime events that are in the percentage of segments in the city contained in these high crime count groups. In this retrospective approach the level of crime concentration and the group identiﬁcation are both computed on the same years of data. This strategy detects general consistency from year to year in the level of crime for a street segment, which is captured by the latent group measures. There is uncertainty how to handle groups in which the segments show strong increases or decreases in crime over the period: does one include them among the ‘‘highest’’ crime segments in all years, or just the years that their group has relatively high crime levels? We sidestep this issue by adopting an analogous approach: we sum the total number of crime events (for each crime type) in each segment over all years, and then determine the top 5 % of segments for a particular crime type based on this measure. We refer to this as historically adjusted crime concentration.

What are the Theoretical Implications of a Law of Crime Concentration?

If the law of crime concentration is true, a counterintuitive implication is that there is no variability to explain. Social science research typically focuses on variance across units, and attempts to ‘‘explain’’ it. Weisburd et al. (2012) revealed that there is a street-to-street variability of crime as well as criminal opportunities and structural characteristics. They hypothesized and tested whether these factors impact crime rates and stability in street segments and stated that ‘‘a large array of opportunity and social disorganization measures inﬂuence the likelihood of a street segment being in the chronic-crime pattern’’ (p. 160). But what does it mean if the total variability across the smaller units within a larger unit is constrained by some force to be a speciﬁc value? Does this make the study of variance at smaller units obsolete? Let us consider this issue.

- 2 Given that random chance is driving those in the ﬁrst category of segments—those that have an unexpectedly high number of crimes in a particular year—it is extremely unlikely that there would be something systematically driving this. If there is something systematic about them, this would imply that they instead belong in the second category, as they were legitimately high crime segments in one year but then changed the following year.
- 3 If one wished to construct a theory at the level of the micro-units, one would need to posit at least two classes of high crime street segments: (1) consistently high crime segments; (2) variable high crime segments. And this would require an explanation for the existence of these latter segments that vary between high and low crime levels from year to year. Whereas most existing micro-geography theories explain why some locations have more or less crime, this would instead require a theory of some characteristic(s) that cause certain locations to be locked in an equilibrium in which they ﬂuctuate between high and low crime levels from year to year. We are aware of no such theory.


Fig. 1 Two hypothetical cities with varying numbers of high and low crime segments

City A City B

|n|n|n|n|n| |n|n|n|n|n|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|n|n|n|n|n| |n|X|X|X|n|
|n|n|X|n|n| |n|X|X|X|n|
|n|n|n|n|n| |n|n|n|n|n|


Note: X = high crime; n = low crime

Consider a stylized example in which there is some variable X that entirely explains the amount of crime in segments. Suppose, for example, that segments containing this variable have ten times as much crime as segments without this variable. One implication is that the composition of segments with such a feature within a city will explain the amount of crime in the city. Thus, a city that has more segments with variable X will have higher crime on these segments, and this will sum up to more crime in the city. But this also has implications for the level of concentration of crime in the segments within a city.

For example, consider two hypothetical cities, A and B. These are shown in Fig. 1, and in city A 5 % of the segments contain high concentrations of variable X (1 of the 20 units) . These segments will have tenfold more crime than the other segments in the city. And this will result in a certain level of concentration of crime in these segments. But consider city B in which 30 % of the segments contain a high concentration of variable X (6 of the 20 units). We would expect these segments to have tenfold more crime than the other segments in the city. However, a consequence is that the level of crime concentration in city B will be different than that in city A. Given that variable X increases crime tenfold in those segments, then city A will not only have less overall crime than city B, but the crime it has will be more concentrated (34.5 % of the crime in the top 5 % of segments compared to 13.5 % for city B).4 Note that if we posited a more complicated model in which crime is a function of many variables, the example becomes more complicated; however, it is nonetheless still trivial to construct cities that differ in composition of the measures of interest, and therefore would be expected to have different levels of crime concentration.

How to avoid this theoretical dilemma? One theoretical approach would be a very complicated theory of multiple determinants of crime, but in which there is also some larger functional process that leads all cities to have the ‘‘proper’’ mix of these variables that yields a similar level of crime concentration. This is clearly a quite complicated theory, and there is certainly no such theory existing in the literature. Note as well that such a functional theory necessarily would exist at the level of the city, a large geographic unit that is typically not the purview of much research on crime and place. A second theoretical approach would be to presume that whereas a measure such as X indeed has a positive impact on the amount of crime in the segment, the relative level of increased crime would differ depending on the city context. In our stylized example, if the effect of variable X in city B was still a tenfold increase in crime in the segments, city A would require a threefold increase in crime in the segment to have an

- 4 In city A, 1 segment has 10 crime incidents and the other 19 have 1, thus: (1*10) ? (19*1) = 29 crime incidents. The one segment (the top 5 %) has 10/29 of the crime incidents, or 34.5 %. In city B, 6 segments have 10 incidents and the other 14 have 1, thus: (6*10) ? (14*1) = 74 crime incidents. The top segment (the top 5 %), has 10/74 of the crime incidents, or 13.5 %.


equal 13.5 % concentration of crime. Again, we are not aware of any existing theories that posit such a cross-level interaction in which the effect of a measure at the segment level differs fundamentally based on the composition of the measure in the city overall. Nonetheless, the implication is that, if such a law exists, scholars will need to construct theories that explicitly take into account macro characteristics of cities. Researchers would therefore need to not only theorize such cross-level interactions, but to test them

- as well. A third theoretical possibility is that there is in fact no such variable X that explains the

location of crime on speciﬁc segments. This would certainly be a disheartening implication for theories such as crime patterning theory that focus on why crime occurs in some locations and not others. In this scenario, the structural process that gives rise to a speciﬁc level of crime concentration in cities would exist entirely at the level of the city. Given the empirical body of evidence focusing on local characteristics that are associated with the existence of more crime at certain localities, we ﬁnd this possibility particularly unlikely.

The above considerations suggest that a law of crime concentration—as stated—would certainly be a large challenge to criminological ecological theory if such a law is true. For these reasons—and given that there is limited empirical evidence regarding the law of crime concentration and uncertainty regarding which concentration measure to use and which macro units to use—we empirically explore it here with a large sample of cities in the southern California region. Our empirical tests also account for the random probability that a certain degree of concentration will always be observed.

Data and Methods

Data

The crime data come from the Southern California Crime Study (SCCS), a study of a large number of police agencies in the southern California region. The 42 cities included in the study with at least 40,000 population are shown in Appendix Table 10; in ancillary models all 82 cities with at least 10,000 population are used. The data come from crime reports ofﬁcially coded and reported by the police departments. We classiﬁed crime events into ﬁve Uniform Crime Report (UCR) crime types: aggravated assault, robbery, burglary, motor vehicle theft, and larceny. We do not include homicides given the rareness of these events in these cities. We also computed a measure of total Part 1 crime events for these six crime types (including homicides), for an approximate comparison to studies using the more inclusive measure of calls for service in a city. We used crime data from 2005 to 2012 given that these years provide us the largest sample of cities (some cities do not have more recent data, and only a smaller number have data from 2000 to 2004). Given that we know the actual location of the crime event, we are able to locate these events to speciﬁc street segments.

Crime events were geocoded for each city separately to latitude–longitude point locations using a geographic information system (ArcGIS 10.2) and placed to the nearest street segments based on geographic proximity. The geocoding match rate was 97.2 % over these cities, with the lowest value at 91.4 %. Previous studies have sometimes excluded calls for service that occurred at intersections. The reasons for doing this were (1) since the events

- at intersections could be considered part of any one of the participating street segments, there is no clear method for assigning them to one or another; and (2) incident reports at


intersections differed dramatically from those at street segments (Weisburd et al. 2012; Weisburd 2015). However, in our crime data the characteristics of crime at intersections are not different from those at street segments, therefore dropping them is not appropriate. Thus, for the 2.2 % of events at intersections, we evenly assigned them to contiguous street segments. For example, if a crime incident occurred on a typical intersection where two roads cross, each of the four segments is assigned 0.25 of a crime.

Table 7 in the Appendix shows the summary statistics for the 42 cities used in the primary analyses. There is considerable variability: the average household income over these cities ranges from about $46,000 to $156,000. The cities, on average, are about 5 % black, although they range from 0 to 33 % black. The cities are, on average, 41.5 % Latino, ranging from 9 % to almost all Latino. And whereas in the average city about 29 % of the population has at least a bachelor’s degree, this ranges from 4 to 66 %. And the average city has about 175,000 population, ranging from cities with 40,000 population up to Los Angeles (with 3.7 million). Table 8 presents the crime counts for the cities available in each of the years of the analyses. These tables show that we have considerable variability across these cities for assessing the level of crime concentration.

Methods

We ﬁrst geocoded each crime incident to a speciﬁc street segment. Then, to measure unadjusted crime concentration for each city we computed the number of crime events (of our ﬁve Part 1 crime types and the combined total crime measure) that occurred on each segment in each year of the study. For each city, we then sorted the segments based on the number of crime events of a speciﬁc type (from highest to lowest) in a particular year, and computed the percent of overall crime events that occurred on the top 5 % of segments.

To assess the random probability of crime concentration, we adopted a small Monte Carlo simulation. For each city, we divided the crime count for a particular year by the number of segments, which yielded the mean number of crime events in each segment. We then generated the expected number of crime events in each segment from a Poisson distribution using this expected mean for each segment. This approach uses the probability integral transform methods of Kemp and Kemp (Kemp and Kemp 1990, 1991), and is hardcoded in Stata 13.1. After generating the number of crime events in each segment based on this simulation, we sorted the segments from highest to lowest crime events and computed the percent of overall crime events in the 5 % of segments with the most crime. We repeated this simulation and the calculations 10 times for each city to smooth random variability over simulations; we computed the mean number of crime events contained in these top 5 % of segments over the 10 simulations.

As a third way of assessing crime concentration, we used an approach analogous to studies using growth mixture models to determine high crime segments based on information from all years of crime data. In this historically adjusted crime concentration measure we: (1) sorted the segments based on the number of crime events of a speciﬁc type (from highest to lowest) summed over all available years, and then (2) computed the percent of overall crime events that occurred on the top 5 % of segments in the current year. This approach uses information from all years to assess high crime segments in a particular year, and therefore it does not entirely address the random probability of crime concentration issue.

As a fourth way of assessing crime concentration, we used our preferred approach that we refer to as temporally adjusted crime concentration in which we: (1) sorted the segments based on the number of crime events of a speciﬁc type (from highest to lowest) in the prior year, and then (2) computed the percent of overall crime events that occurred on

the top 5 % of segments in the current year. Note that this approach requires crime data from the prior year; therefore, it cannot be calculated in cities for the ﬁrst year in which crime data are available. Therefore this measure in our tables will have fewer cities in some years compared to the traditional approach to assessing crime concentration.

We performed the above computations on all cities in our study with at least 40,000 population. We also performed the computations on all cities in the study with at least 10,000 population and present these ancillary results in the Appendix to demonstrate the results when using very small population cities. Finally, we also present the results for the 16 cities with at least 100,000 population to describe the pattern for relatively large cities.

Although our primary focus is on these descriptive results showing the differences in crime concentration across cities, we also demonstrate the problem of not accounting for the random distribution of crime events when using the traditional measure. We accomplish this by demonstrating that including only measures of size of city and number of crime events explains a relatively large proportion of the difference in this measure across cities. We estimated linear regression models in which the units of analysis were cities and the outcome variable was the unadjusted percentage of crime in the top 5 % of segments in the city. These models included just three covariates: (1) the number of crime segments in the city; (2) the count of crimes of that type in the city in that year; (3) an interaction between these two measures.

Results

We begin by showing the amount of crime concentration in the 5 % of street segments with the most crime among cities with at least 40,000 population; this is the standard approach for assessing such concentration and does not account for the random distribution of crime (Table 9 in the Appendix shows the results for all cities with at least 10,000 population). In Table 1, the ﬁrst column shows the year, the second column shows the number of cities we had data for in that year, and the third column shows the mean percentage of aggravated assaults that occurred in the top 5 % of the segments over these cities. Thus, in 2005 we had 23 cities, and in the average city a very high 94.8 % of the aggravated assaults occurred in the top 5 % of the segments. However, note that the standard deviation in the amount of concentration over these cities is 11.3 %: thus, if the crime concentration levels were a normal distribution, we’d expect that 2/3 of the cities would have between 72 and 100 % crime concentration. Of course, the maximum value can be 100 %, which is indeed what we observe in a number of cities.

As we move down the rows for the other years, we see that the results for aggravated assault are quite consistent: the mean level of crime concentration ranges from 92.6 to 96 %, the standard deviation ranges from 7.7 to 12.1 %, the minimum value ranges from 61.6 to 72.1 %, and the maximum value is always 100 %. Thus, there appears to be a high amount of concentration for aggravated assault (over 90 %) for this standard measure.

However, as we argued earlier, a problem with these results using the traditional approach to computing concentration is that they do not account for the fact that we would expect to see a certain level of concentration simply based on random chance. To address this, in the bottom panel of Table 1 we present the results from our temporally adjusted crime concentration measure. Here, we see much smaller values for the level of concentration of aggravated assault. In 2005, the mean level of concentration for aggravated assault is just 33.2 % over these cities (60 % points lower than the unadjusted estimate from the top of Table 1). There is still considerable variability over these cities, with a

Table 1Crime clustering for cities with at least 40,000 population, by ﬁve types of crime and total Part 1 crimes

Aggravated assaultRobberyBurglary

ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)

20052233.216.516.2100.02243.217.911.185.72139.914.624.490.6

20062326.216.49.290.92337.720.77.1100.02235.916.414.792.7

20072526.615.03.280.02539.820.70.0100.02435.715.814.487.3

Average94.310.366.2100.096.48.370.0100.071.818.144.7100.0

Average66.816.237.9100.082.216.948.4100.050.513.626.1100.0

20052394.811.365.7100.02396.09.469.2100.02276.920.044.4100.0

20083992.611.564.3100.03895.59.467.5100.03871.117.645.5100.0

20094094.210.467.0100.04096.28.964.4100.03970.716.946.7100.0

20104193.610.866.4100.04197.37.567.2100.04070.917.146.6100.0

20114295.48.172.1100.04298.35.176.8100.04170.417.446.2100.0

20123396.07.770.0100.03298.54.483.3100.03372.519.244.1100.0

20062593.412.162.3100.02594.311.266.0100.02471.919.343.1100.0

20073994.210.661.6100.03995.110.165.3100.03870.117.441.3100.0

20052369.318.744.2100.02384.718.151.0100.02252.214.436.8100.0

20062566.217.941.3100.02583.017.950.2100.02451.914.231.7100.0

20073966.915.143.5100.03982.016.648.9100.03851.212.629.9100.0

20083967.814.247.0100.03880.716.549.2100.03852.013.125.4100.0

20094067.215.544.6100.04081.916.649.5100.03949.512.030.5100.0

20104167.015.438.6100.04181.916.443.8100.04050.111.928.8100.0

20114267.415.543.9100.04281.416.943.7100.04149.712.425.9100.0

20123362.517.60.0100.03282.316.550.9100.03347.218.10.0100.0

Percent of crime in segments in top 5 % of crime over all years (historically adjusted concentration)

Percent of crime in segments in top 5 % of crime in prior year (temporally adjusted concentration)

Percent of crime in segments in top 5 % of crime in current year (unadjusted concentration)

ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)

ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)

Average29.315.25.789.439.316.76.383.834.914.714.093.0

20114128.515.67.0100.04137.316.10.0100.04033.913.111.591.0

20083930.612.75.290.03841.812.212.562.23835.714.512.498.2

20104029.312.34.564.34041.316.710.3100.03933.913.217.096.0

20093931.516.20.0100.03937.315.20.059.93834.813.317.591.1

20123328.516.50.090.03236.014.09.162.63329.816.40.096.9

Average79.918.748.0100.068.210.948.0100.059.811.740.0100.0

20083978.018.350.3100.03866.49.745.3100.03958.811.038.6100.0

20094081.018.245.1100.03967.89.846.8100.04059.510.938.3100.0

20104181.117.847.9100.04067.79.447.4100.04159.510.539.1100.0

20114282.018.746.9100.04168.09.048.9100.04259.110.440.5100.0

20052380.920.350.8100.02270.113.450.7100.02362.513.743.2100.0

20062577.620.045.8100.02567.812.548.4100.02558.812.740.0100.0

20073977.118.247.6100.03966.810.647.3100.03958.410.539.3100.0

20123381.318.249.6100.03371.112.549.0100.03461.914.441.2100.0

20052359.215.739.0100.02259.112.045.9100.02354.312.739.6100.0

20062559.317.732.2100.02559.714.440.5100.02553.412.735.6100.0

20073958.413.533.6100.03959.611.744.0100.03953.610.735.9100.0

20083959.314.434.6100.03858.511.136.4100.03954.011.133.2100.0

Motor vehicle theftLarcenyTotal crime

Aggravated assaultRobberyBurglary

Percent of crime in segments in top 5 % of crime over all years (historically adjusted concentration)

Percent of crime in segments in top 5 % of crime in current year (unadjusted concentration)

ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)

Motor vehicle theftLarcenyTotal crime

Average35.115.79.788.150.813.520.495.048.312.326.495.8

20052237.617.518.1100.02153.512.641.897.02251.413.134.297.6

20093936.615.513.5100.03851.712.424.995.13948.711.526.596.1

20083937.111.316.857.73850.912.027.995.33948.711.427.695.4

20072535.215.212.078.62548.515.30.092.82547.912.532.693.2

20104034.614.98.294.43951.311.028.789.14048.910.330.794.3

20114133.115.90.095.84051.711.825.595.34148.410.827.296.9

20062336.919.19.096.22346.716.60.095.52347.013.432.496.0

20123329.715.90.081.83351.916.314.3100.03445.115.00.096.6

Average58.115.327.5100.059.012.334.5100.053.511.532.6100.0

20123356.917.220.6100.03356.017.10.0100.03451.512.916.1100.0

20094058.613.928.9100.03959.811.036.4100.04054.110.833.4100.0

20104157.213.731.1100.04059.710.636.7100.04153.910.433.7100.0

20114255.916.60.0100.04159.710.335.6100.04253.510.833.2100.0

Percent of crime in segments in top 5 % of crime in prior year (temporally adjusted concentration)

standard deviation of 16.5 % in 2005. Most notably, the range of values is quite extreme over cities: from 16.2 to 100 %. And looking at the other years we see the same pattern for aggravated assault: the mean value over these years ranges from 26.2 to 33.2 %, the standard deviation ranges from 12.3 to 16.5 %, and the range is from less than 10 to 100 % in most years across cities.

The middle panel of Table 1 presents the results for the historically adjusted crime concentration measure (that uses information from all years to determine the highest crime segments). For aggravated assault, the average level of concentration over these years (66.8 %) is about midway between the value for the unadjusted measure (94.3 %) and the temporally adjusted measure (29.3 %). Importantly, there is considerable variability across these cities even when using this concentration measure as the average standard deviation over these years is 16.2 % and the range is about 40 to 100 %.

Turning to the other violent crime studied here—robbery—we see that this crime appears even more concentrated based on the standard measure of crime concentration. The mean percentage of robberies that occur in the top 5 % of segments across these cities is 96 % in 2005, and ranges from 94.3 to 98.5 % over these years. The standard deviation over these cities is narrower than for aggravated assaults, although this is because the higher mean bumps up against the maximum possible value of 100 % and therefore constrains the variability. In the bottom part of Table 1 we see that the degree of concentration based on the temporally adjusted crime concentration measure is again considerably lower than the unadjusted measure. The mean level of robbery concentration over these years ranges from 36 to 43.2 %. Thus, this temporal adjustment provides a very different picture of the amount of robbery concentration. In part, this is because robbery is a relatively rare event compared to the other crime types studied here, and as a result we expect a higher concentration of robberies simply based on random chance. Notably, the historically adjusted concentration measure (the middle panel) demonstrates very high average concentration of 82 % over these years. Nonetheless, the range of values across cities in the top 5 % of segments based on this deﬁnition is about 50 to 100 %, with an average standard deviation of 17 % across these years.

Turning to the property crimes, we see that burglary shows less crime concentration, on average, compared to the violent crimes when using the traditional crime concentration measure. We see that, on average over these cities, 71.8 % of burglary events occur in the top 5 % of segments over the study period. The average standard deviation over years in the cities is 18 %, so there is considerable variability across cities in this concentration. The fact that the city with the least concentration is typically around 45 % in these years is also evidence of this variability.

We highlight an important point: whereas one might be inclined to conclude that a property crime such as burglary exhibits less concentration than the violent crimes based on the top panel of Table 1—and perhaps construct theories regarding the inherently more geographically concentrated nature of violent crime—the bottom panel of Table 1 shows that this difference evaporates when temporally adjusting the measure of concentration. In fact, the average temporally adjusted concentration of burglary over these years is 34.9 %, which is only a little bit below robbery (39.3 %) and slightly higher than aggravated assault (29.3 %). In the middle panel, the historically adjusted measure again shows considerable variability over these cities with the percent of crime contained in the top 5 % of segments ranging from about 30 % to 100 % across cities over these years.

For motor vehicle theft, whereas we see that it exhibits somewhat higher concentration than burglary using the unadjusted measure (79.9 % on average over these years), the temporally adjusted level of concentration for motor vehicle theft is very similar to that for

burglary. Over these years, the mean level of temporally adjusted concentration for motor vehicle theft is 35.1 % with a standard deviation of 15.7 % over these cities. Once again, the average level of historically adjusted crime concentration (the middle panel) is somewhere between the unadjusted and temporally adjusted measures. Nonetheless, even this approach demonstrates considerable variability across cities, with the top 5 % of segments accounting for between 30 and 100 % of the crime across these cities.

The results for larceny follow a similar pattern to the other crime types, with an interesting twist. Whereas larceny appears to be the least concentrated type of crime studied here when using the traditional measure of crime concentration—the unadjusted measure shows that the average city over the years of the study experiences 59.8 % of larcenies in the top 5 % of segments, which is lower than the other four crime types—it actually has the highest level of concentration when using our temporally adjusted measure. When temporally adjusting larceny, we ﬁnd that the top 5 % of segments contain 50.8 % of the larcenies, on average, over these years. This is a higher percentage than all four of the other types of crime. Thus, not only is it important to temporally adjust the measure of crime concentration—as our results show that the estimate of crime concentration can be reduced between 30 and 60 % points for the various crime types—but the results for larceny illuminate as well that the level of concentration will not be reduced uniformly across crime types when temporally adjusting, but rather the reduction can actually differ a fair amount. In this case, our conclusion of which crime type exhibits the highest concentration is completely reversed based on using this temporal adjustment. The results are different yet with the historically adjusted concentration measure, as the level of concentration for some crime types (particularly aggravated assault) get reduced more from the unadjusted measure compared to other crime types (i.e., robbery and larceny). Thus, robbery appears to have the highest concentration with the historically adjusted measure.

Finally, we turn to the measures of concentration for total crimes, to assess the extent to which the patterns we have observed are driven by disaggregating crime types. This higher aggregation lowers the unadjusted concentration measures modestly because the crime counts are now higher and therefore the impact of random crime events does not as strongly impact these measures. The average unadjusted concentration of total crimes is 59.8 % over these years, which is lower than any of the speciﬁc crime types. But the temporally adjusted concentration of total crime is 48.3 % over these years, which is similar to the value for larceny. We observe considerable variability across these cities in the level of concentration even when aggregating to total crime: the unadjusted measure has an average standard deviation of 11.7 % and an average range from 40 to 100 % across these years. The temporally adjusted measure has an average standard deviation of 12.3 %, and an average range from 26 to 96 %, suggesting considerable variability. Based on the historically adjusted measure (the middle panel), the average total crime concentration across years is 53.5 %, with an average standard deviation of 11.5 %. This deﬁnition also has considerable variability across cities in the level of concentration for total crime, ranging from about 33 to 100 % across years.

There is clearly considerable variability in the level of crime concentration across these cities over all of these crime types. We next demonstrate how much of this variability in the unadjusted crime concentration can be explained by the size of the city and the frequency of crime events.

Simple Models Explaining the Level of Crime Concentration

Given that we have observed considerable variability in the level of unadjusted crime concentration, we use very simple models to illustrate the extent to which the level of unadjusted crime concentration is driven by random processes (by including only information on the number of crime events and the number of segments in a city). The outcome variable is the percent crime concentration for a particular crime type in a particular city in a particular year. The results are shown in Table 2 for cities with at least 40,000 population.

It is notable that this simple model explains between 34 and 75 % of the variance in the level of unadjusted crime concentration in a city. This highlights the problem of using an unadjusted measure of crime concentration, given that in cities with low crime counts the random probability of placement of crime events can largely impact this measure. The variance explained is somewhat lower for total crime, but still substantial as the model explains 43 % of the variance. In all of these models the level of concentration decreases as the number of crime events increases in the city. And the level of concentration increases as the number of segments increases (given that there will be more segments in the top

- 5 %, by deﬁnition, which will increase the expected concentration for a set number of crime events). And the interaction is positive for all models.


As a comparison, we estimated similar models for the historically adjusted concentration measure, and the middle rows of this table show the R-square results for these models 7–12. For each crime type we see that the R-square is reduced somewhat when deﬁning crime based on all years compared to the unadjusted measure. Nonetheless, this approach does not entirely account for the random nature of crime events, as these simple models containing city size and number of crime events explain between 16 and 59 % of the variance in crime concentration across cities. The bottom two rows of Table 2 show the R-squares for the same models estimated on the temporally adjusted measure of crime concentration. In these models, the three covariates are only sometimes statistically signiﬁcant. And the variance explained is just 4–12 % for the 5 crime types, and 18 % for total crime. Thus, our temporally adjusted crime concentration measure is largely accounting for these random processes that are driven by the number of crime events per segment in a city.

What do High and Low Crime Concentration Cities Look Like?

Given that we observed considerable variability in the crime concentration of these cities in a particular year, do the speciﬁc cities exhibit consistency over time regarding high or low levels of concentration? In the top panel of Table 3, of cities with at least 40,000 population we list the 10 lowest temporally adjusted aggravated assault concentration values averaged over the years of the study. Values are missing for years in which we did not have crime data. The ﬁrst column shows the population of the city in 2010, and we can see that these are fairly substantially sized cities. Two of these cities have more than 100,000 population. The second column shows the number of segments in the city, the third column lists the number of aggravated assault events in the city in 2010, and the fourth column lists the percentage of these events that are contained in the highest 5 % of segments in 2010. We can see that although these cities represent relatively low adjusted crime concentration, the unadjusted crime concentration values are all 100 % for these cities. The ﬁfth column helps in explaining this result: this shows the expected level of concentration based on

Table 2Regression models predicting percent of crime events occurring in the top 5 % of segments in a year for cities with at least 40,000 population, averagedresults over

2005-12

Aggravated assaultRobberyBurglaryMotor vehicle theftLarcenyTotal crime

(21.56) 0.5638**

(20.08)

(1.04) 0.0000

- (2.81)

0.0497**

- (3.67)


(0.22)

2R0.5440.7470.5270.5080.3400.425

20.3130.5920.2020.2540.1590.224R

20.0430.0490.0740.0620.1130.182R

Average N35.335.034.435.334.635.4

Average N35.335.034.435.334.635.4

Average N32.832.531.932.832.132.9

- -0.4731**

(7.21)

- -0.3748**

(5.44)

- -0.2793**

(5.02)

- -0.0559**

- (3.11)

-0.0481**

- (4.21)




(18.85) 0.6503**

(3.16) 0.0341**

-0.0003

(21.01) 0.7841**

(3.93) 0.0462**

(2.93) 0.0008

(1.41)

(6.06) 0.0015**

(105.66) 0.7503**

(5.82) 0.0586**

Model results using top 5 % of segments from prior year (temporally adjusted concentration)

Model results using top 5 % of segments over all years (historically adjusted concentration)

Model results using top 5 % of segments in current year (unadjusted concentration)

(3.56) 0.0041**

(42.97) 0.9658**

(3.95) 0.0185**

Crime events-0.4873**

Crime events X number of segments0.0030**

Intercept0.9179**

Number of segments0.0306**

(5.28)

\\**p.01 (two-tail test), *p.05 (two-tail test).tvalues in parentheses. Coefﬁcients not shown for historically adjusted concentration models and temporally adjusted

concentration models

(%)

Aliso Viejo46,32913412210010018191318751829

Yorba Linda62,915276914641001009180901006410090

Mission Viejo92,615321940100100392292421201811

Colton52,187156456100100142926

El Cajon97,932194026440443238403935

Vista92,478245821437624140373131

San Marcos78,127223811743973642433235

Oceanside164,709549159443514044434444

Escondido140,998408234655645054555853

Carlsbad99,7534549153391003539394037

Encinitas58,761237185401003238402838

San Diego1,282,80033,924347641543841414139

San Clemente60,774220623100100359352317118

47,5391653121001004024191508200

Redondo Beach66,054136044100100161871618779

Laguna Niguel62,614237325100100331536311612155

- 2005

(%)

- 2006

(%)

- 2007

(%)

- 2008

(%)

- 2009

(%)

- 2010

(%)

- 2011


(%)

Perris63,64420814510010030223027212114

Irvine199,11757071910010021191921173211

105,21143761163110031334039443132

Corona150,49749518110010027112417232127

PopulationSegments2010Temporally adjusted in top 5 % segments

(%) Expected % in top

5 (%)

Table 3Cities with relatively low or high concentration of aggravated assault

Incidents% in top 5

High concentration cities

Low concentration cities

Yorba Linda100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100

10010010010010010010010097828877100100100100

(%)

Colton10010010010063707169

Encinitas10099100100100100567064636170

Carlsbad100100100100100100717575747573

San Clemente1001001001001001001001007666687682576358

San Diego977778828584576160626160

San Marcos10094100100100100666667697074

Oceanside977582817978586164626058

Redondo Beach1001001001001001001001006244915664524951

Escondido1009596969895707173757370

El Cajon686667707295515854575454

Vista8269708189100626156525059

Laguna Niguel1001001001001001001001008084898084768867

Mission Viejo1001001001001001001001007875758490667369

Aliso Viejo1001001001001001001001009185539157737167

- 2005

(%)

- 2006

(%)

- 2007

(%)

- 2008

(%)

- 2009

(%)

- 2010

(%)

- 2011


Irvine100100100100100100100100100100100100100100

(%)

Corona10010010010010010010070686770797855

10010010010010010010068767271717574

Perris10091909710010010052585353605960

Percent in top 5 % segments (unadjusted)Historically adjusted in top 5 % segments

- 2005

(%)

- 2006

(%)

- 2007

(%)

- 2008

(%)

- 2009

(%)

- 2010

(%)

- 2011

(%)

- 2012


(%)

High concentration cities

Low concentration cities

- Table 3continued


random chance in 2010. For these cities the value is in fact 100 %. Thus, the high concentration of aggravated assault in these cities is not a substantive indication of the tendency for crime to concentrate in these cities, but rather simply a statistical anomaly of the strategy of computing unadjusted crime concentration values.

Note that many of these cities have quite low values of temporally adjusted concentration. For example, Redondo Beach has a population of 66,000 and is below 18 % in all years (and below 10 % in several years). Thus, this is a beach city that consistently exhibits quite low temporally adjusted aggravated assault concentration. San Clemente is another beach city that has very low values in most years. Corona is an inland city that is typically below 25 % concentration. Given that low concentration cities include the low crime city of Laguna Niguel and the relatively high crime city of Colton implies that the level of crime does not seem to describe these low aggravated assault concentration cities.

In the bottom half of Table 3, we list cities with at least 40,000 population and the top 10 highest average temporally adjusted aggravated assault concentration values over the study period. These cities typically have relatively consistent adjusted concentration values. Yorba Linda, a low crime city, is particularly notable in experiencing aggravated assaults in the same locations over years. Escondido, a city with 140,000 population, is consistently between 50 and 60 % adjusted concentration over years, which contrasts with large cities such as Irvine and Corona in the top panel of this table. Note that Irvine (100 %) and Corona (about 70 %) have historically adjusted aggravated assault concentration that is similar to that of Escondido (about 70 %), again highlighting the importance of how crime concentration is deﬁned.

- Table 4 presents the high and low concentration cities for burglary, and the top

panel lists cities that consistently exhibit quite low levels of burglary concentration when using our temporally adjusted measure. Again, simply using the unadjusted measure would lead to the inappropriate conclusion of a high level of burglary concentration. Much of this apparent concentration is simply driven by random chance, which can be seen by comparing the results for 2010 in columns 4 and 5, which show that the expected percentage of concentration is often nearly as high as the observed percentage. On the other hand, the bottom panel of this table lists cities that consistently have considerably higher levels of burglary concentration based on the temporally adjusted measure. In these cities, although the number of crime events in the most extreme segments is not very much larger than expected by chance—which may lead to a presumption that randomness is driving the process—the higher values of the temporally adjusted concentration measure highlight that these burglaries are generally occurring in the same set of segments from year to year. Thus, whereas the cities in the top panel have temporally adjusted crime concentration levels consistently below 30 % or even below 20 %, the ones in the bottom panel are typically above 40 %, or even 50 %. This difference is also present for several of the cities when using historically adjusted concentration.

- Table 5 presents the high and low concentration cities for total crime. In the top panel


there are seven cities with an average temporally adjusted concentration value of 40 % or less, whereas in the bottom panel the low crime city of Yorba Linda is above 90 % and two other cities are above 60 %. And these cities typically exhibit quite consistent levels of total crime concentration over the years of the study. This gap is also evident in the historically adjusted measure, as ﬁve cities have average concentration values of 42 % or less, whereas six have values of 60 % or more. Furthermore, although the conﬂation of

Los Angeles3,772,48673,99115,92854332826242122242122

Santa Monica88,67918153295236191218171112

Colton52,18715646023428343937

Santee52,966172616741564245414342

Huntington Beach188,91467581803473135474746474646

La Mesa56,250152933851332320232421

National City57,343142028741343638415452

Yorba Linda62,915276975961009193879891969197

Laguna Niguel62,61423731081001003223143128283019

Redondo Beach66,054136039453312425222430242627

Downey110,921240462547312429232226192019

San Clemente60,7742206101100994821252217202345

Encinitas58,761237120981623126312719

Lake Forest76,724248116740773415384442404234

Anaheim333,039753514016436323134300

Irvine199,11757077664643504652515046420

- 2008

(%)

- 2009

(%)

- 2010

(%)

- 2011


(%)

Lake Elsinore48,6442100351423944425440414253

Corona150,4974951622674631343025222523

Palm Desert48,5343027562463651504750474647

Temecula95,8293429527563954595867655648

PopulationSegments2010Temporally adjusted in top 5 % segments

- 2005

(%)

- 2006 (%)2007


(%)

in top 5 (%)

5 (%) Expected %

Incidents% in top

- Table 4Cities with relatively low or high concentration of burglary


Anaheim61626364611005048495147100

Yorba Linda100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100

(%)

Colton6463575746565147

La Mesa545453516054403532414240

Lake Forest100939510097100100954154606159656255

National City616567677673505155536561

San Clemente1001001001001001001001005762506150505057

Huntington Beach100656669686766655754555857575454

Los Angeles56555453535454543836373436353434

Redondo Beach50464150505348554136303843363434

Downey53585151544746503741333436293125

Santa Monica4346474752474432302530292621

Encinitas678172818064465549504742

Santee757882818287546059546259

Laguna Niguel1001001001001001001001004355505849574838

Irvine73737979797774100596066656661580

(%) 2011

(%)

Corona6370716468676646484942414243

Palm Desert7373717273757861606157575965

Lake Elsinore7879857171748058606958556066

Temecula8681879089828372697376716563

(%) 2010

(%) 2009

Percent in top 5 % segments (unadjusted)Historically adjusted in top 5 % segments

(%) 2008

(%) 2007

(%) 2006

(%) 2005

(%) 2012

(%) 2011

(%) 2010

(%) 2009

(%) 2008

(%) 2007

(%) 2006

2005

High concentration cities

Low concentration cities

- Table 4continued


Anaheim333,0397535694455184746494716

San Marcos78,1272238169456205555565054

Los Angeles3,772,48673,99172,48939183837362827312731

Redondo Beach66,0541360107243193432333132333228

Alhambra83,3891456186849163938383635414038

Escondido140,9984082445156175954565961

National City57,3431420195254165458545856

Chula Vista229,6145995507953195856535855

Vista92,4782458233353185054535255

Santa Monica88,679181533014214343233363536

Encinitas58,7612371100553263938383840

Fontana189,466535436485620384143454440

Mission Viejo92,6153219117254295445535755545353

Downey110,9212404394658145157535157585350

Santa Ana325,2165450511944184440403936363836

San Clemente60,774220652563326240344142384041

Yorba Linda62,915276921194709896939596949797

(%) 2011

(%)

Temecula95,82934292314612066646264666159

Palm Desert48,53430271775612163615861606161

Perris63,64420811688512044383937414340

(%) 2010

(%) 2009

PopulationSegments2010Temporally adjusted in top 5 % segments

(%) 2008

(%) 2007

(%) 2006

in top 5 (%) 2005

5 (%) Expected %

Incidents% in top

- Table 5Cities with relatively low or high concentration of total crime


Yorba Linda100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100100

(%)

Anaheim5653555554100535052535116

Vista565659605861545457565557

National City545862596261535660566060

Chula Vista656262606462636059576160

San Clemente78626163636363666351465349514853

Redondo Beach45424344464342434136363840363433

Los Angeles43434239383941414039383333343334

Alhambra44464543434946474241414039464141

Downey58615958636256575659565560605554

San Marcos596364635962555959605557

Escondido626460626566606157596263

Santa Monica4039393942424238373637383839

Santa Ana49464747444446464643434341414141

Fontana5349505156545447454647504844

Encinitas535552535252464746454544

Mission Viejo72666871706972695458616460606360

(%) 2011

(%)

Palm Desert7069667071727266656365656666

Perris5047474751515046444343464545

Temecula7472727474707170686770706566

(%) 2010

(%) 2009

Percent in top 5 % segments (unadjusted)Historically adjusted in top 5 % segments

(%) 2008

(%) 2007

(%) 2006

(%) 2005

(%) 2012

(%) 2011

(%) 2010

(%) 2009

(%) 2008

(%) 2007

(%) 2006

2005

High concentration cities

Low concentration cities

- Table 5continued


[Table 6Large cities (100,000 population) for total crime

PopulationSegments2010Temporally adjusted in top 5 % segments

- 2005

(%)

- 2006

(%)

- 2007

(%)

- 2008

(%)

- 2009

(%)

- 2010

(%)

- 2011

(%)

- 2012


(%)

(%) Expected % in top

5 (%)

Incidents% in top 5

Riverside300,553913258691803234343231333034

Anaheim333,0397535325100100293128310

Santa Ana325,216545043177692926312824242425

Huntington Beach188,914675812210010010262634173230

Burbank102,7232195731001003427232417251221

Downey110,9212404130100962126222926283339

Oceanside164,709549159481524041444344

Escondido140,998408234696645054545853

Fontana189,466535424010010062629263126

Los Angeles3,772,48673,991768679533533323031333034

Chula Vista229,61459951871001003932313731

San Diego1,282,80033,924347682543842414139

Moreno Valley187,42853162519410028263329312433

Irvine199,11757071910010028171415143811

Corona150,49749518110010028142615262126

(Ventura) 105,211437611610010031333839433134

San Buenaventura

Percent in top 5 % segments (unadjusted)Historically adjusted in top 5 % segments

- 2005

(%)

- 2006

(%)

- 2007

(%)

- 2008

(%)

- 2009

(%)

- 2010

(%)

- 2011

(%)

- 2012


(%)

- 2005

(%)

- 2006

(%)

- 2007

(%)

- 2008

(%)

- 2009

(%)

- 2010

(%)

- 2011

(%)

- 2012


(%)

Burbank1001001001001001001001005959615661555646

Irvine100100100100100100100100100100100100100100

Corona10010010010010010010068686772757470

(%)

Riverside75808085939194934954525253535457

Anaheim10010010010010010067636769650

San Diego977778828584586160626060

Oceanside977582817978586064616158

Escondido1009596969895717173757371

Huntington Beach1001001001001001001001006475697773678273

Fontana10010010010010010010056566258626263

Chula Vista100100100100100100757771698071

Downey100100921001001001001005455525053605859

Santa Ana76738386857787914444494847454750

Los Angeles68697074757985874951495251505352

(%) 2011

(%)

San Buenaventura (Ventura)10010010010010010010070767271717774

Moreno Valley9693909094949654525554544853

(%) 2010

Percent in top 5 % segments (unadjusted)Historically adjusted in top 5 % segments

(%) 2009

(%) 2008

(%) 2007

(%) 2006

(%) 2005

(%) 2012

(%) 2011

(%) 2010

(%) 2009

(%) 2008

(%) 2007

(%) 2006

2005

- Table 6continued


randomness is much less present when using total crime compared to the individual crime types (given the larger number of events) as the expected percentage in the top 5 % of segments is often below 20 %, it is still the case that the level of crime concentration for the unadjusted measure is considerably higher among the bottom panel cities compared to those in the top panel.

Finally, our study has provided evidence regarding the level of crime concentration across cities with a range of population values. Nonetheless, in our ﬁnal table we present results for the total crime concentration of just the larger cities in our sample (those with at least 100,000 population), given that initial work regarding the level of crime concentration has tended to focus exclusively on very large cities (Curman et al. 2014; Groff et al. 2010). Even among these relatively large cities, and when measuring total crime, we see considerable variability in the level of concentration over these years (Table 6). Based on our temporally adjusted concentration measure, nine cities have average values less than 30 % over the study period, whereas one city is above 50 % and two other cities are above 40 %. There is also notable variability for the historically adjusted measure: whereas six cities have concentration values above 70 %, six have values of 55 % or below . The low crime city of Irvine is notable in having extremely high unadjusted concentration and based on all years of data (100 %), but having the lowest average temporally adjusted concentration value.

Conclusion

This study has explored the level of crime concentration across 42 cities of varying sizes, and showed that not only is there notable concentration of crime in all cities, there nonetheless is variability across cities in the level of this concentration. Although this study has provided considerable empirical evidence, it has also raised important theoretical questions. We have highlighted that a very large measurement challenge for assessing crime concentration is that by random chance a nontrivial amount of concentration will be observed in cities, and this random component will vary over cities in systematic ways that researchers need to take into account in order to arrive at proper conclusions regarding their data. The use of different-sized cities raised the question of whether crime concentration should indeed be similar over a wide range of city sizes. And in addressing the random component problem of concentration, we raised the theoretical challenge of the temporal stability assumption employed when assessing crime concentration. We also explored some of the counterintuitive theoretical implications if such a law of crime concentration indeed exists.

Our results highlighted that although there is clearly considerable concentration in the level of crime within cities, there is nonetheless a considerable amount of variability in the concentration of crime across these cities. We found that this variability across cities in crime concentration was present for virtually every type of crime we studied, and it was present when we created a combined measure of six Part 1 crimes. Furthermore, we showed that whereas certain cities consistently exhibit relatively high levels of temporally adjusted crime concentration, there are also cities that consistently exhibit relatively low levels. This variability was present for the three different measures of crime concentration we used that made different temporal assumptions about the stability of crime.

A second important takeaway point is that researchers should give more consideration to the choice of the macro unit of analysis when exploring the level of crime concentration

across cities. Should the level of crime concentration be constant across cities of different sizes? Only minimal consideration has been given to this issue: Weisburd (2015) compared a handful of very large cities to a handful of what he described as smaller cities (though they had population levels near 100,000). But cities come in a wide variety of sizes, and more consideration is needed whether crime concentration should indeed be invariant across such different sized cities. This is not a trivial issue, as we highlighted that there are statistical issues that can confound comparisons of crime concentration across cities of different sizes.

We have emphasized that the size of the macro units used when assessing the level of crime concentration has important implications given the statistical anomaly that many measures of crime concentration will have positive values simply due to random chance. We demonstrated that the measure of crime concentration based on the current year does not satisfactorily account for this concentration based on random chance: for a number of cities and a number of crime types the expected crime concentration based on random chance was just as high as the actual value observed. We also demonstrated that a simple model using the number of crime events and the number of segments in a city can explain between 30 and 60 % of the variability in this measure across cities for different crime types. Clearly, this is not a very clean measure for capturing the true level of crime concentration in a city.

In addressing this statistical problem of the random probability of crime concentration, we raised the parallel issue of the temporal aspect of crime concentration. This is a theoretical question that needs more consideration. Weisburd et al. (2004) highlighted that not only is crime concentration observed across multiple years, but it is also often observed in the same street segments. We have highlighted that the temporal assumption made regarding the stability of high crime locations when constructing a concentration measure can lead to different conclusions. We constructed three different concentration measures: one based on the level of crime in that year, a historically adjusted concentration measure that assumes stability in high crime segments over the period of the study, and a novel temporally adjusted measure we proposed that assumes stability from the prior year. We showed that although the ﬁrst measure makes no assumption about the stability of high crime locations over years (but does make an assumption of stability within the year), it is strongly impacted by the random probability of crime concentration. And although variants of the historically adjusted measure have been used in the literature, it has some peculiarities. One issue is that it does not fully account for the random probability problem. Another issue is that there is uncertain theoretical justiﬁcation for using the speciﬁc years in which data is available for constructing the measure, as there is no guarantee that one would obtain similar results if a different set of years were used for deﬁning high crime locations. We have argued that although our temporally adjusted measure is not a perfect estimate of the level of crime concentration—as it likely provides a slight underestimate—the level of underestimate should be relatively similar across cities allowing for useful comparisons across cities. And as we noted earlier, if the underestimate of this measure is not uniform across cities, this would open new research areas to understand why certain street segments are not the

consistently high crime locations that are typically identiﬁed in the crime and place literature, but are instead consistently ﬂuctuating high and low crime locations. Although we are skeptical that such locations exist, this suggests another useful avenue for future research. Nonetheless, this measure does assume that there is stability from year to year in high crime locations, which is a speciﬁc type of crime concentration.

A general challenge for measuring crime concentration that is worth highlighting is the issue of sparse data. This can occur due to a combination of: a small city, a city with relatively few crimes, or a narrow deﬁnition of ‘‘crime.’’ This issue has not received proper attention in the crime concentration literature, and comes to the fore in our analyses here. It is worth noting that this was not as much of an issue in early work by Weisburd and colleagues assessing crime concentration given that they used a very large city along with a more expansive deﬁnition of crime (calls for service). Whereas using a broad deﬁnition of crime helps address the sparse data problem, it raises a conceptual problem: how reasonable is it to assume that all the different types of events that are included in a calls for service measure indeed demonstrate the same spatial pattern (which is the assumption when using such a single measure)? Disaggregating such crime types is likely appropriate if different types of crime concentrate in different locations, and may result in even higher concentration levels observed (albeit raising the sparse data problem). We note that our temporally adjusted measure may also be impacted by sparse data: the measure of high crime segments in one year will have more measurement error in a sparse data scenario, which would presumably systematically reduce the value of the observed concentration measure. It was reassuring that our models explaining the variability in the temporally adjusted measure across cities found that sparseness explained a relatively small amount of variance; nonetheless, this is an issue that needs more consideration.

These questions about the proper temporal stability to observe crime concentration lead directly into several useful theoretical directions spawned by the proposed law of crime concentration. We described some challenging theoretical implications if the law of crime concentration were true. What was particularly notable was that the theoretical explanations were quite likely to come from understanding larger macro geographic units that would give rise to this regularity. Given the explicit focus on micro-geographic units in much of the crime and place research, this is a fascinating implication that possible key insights for this sub-area would require theories at larger geographic units. And if there is indeed considerable variability in the level of crime concentration across cities, as our empirical analyses showed, this raises a challenging and exciting theoretical avenue to explain these differences. For example, one multilevel study found that there is nontrivial variance in concentration at the level of the city (Steenbeek and Weisburd 2016). Note that one possibility is that these differences could be explained entirely by micro-geographic theories: thus, the fact that levels of crime concentration differ over cities could be simply due to different compositions of smaller units within the city. Indeed, we pointed out that these different compositions pose a particular challenge for the law’s hypothesis that the level of concentration will be similar across cities. On the other hand, we cannot rule out the possibility that there may be macro explanations for

why the level of crime concentration differs over cities. Although we are agnostic here in which direction future research should take in trying to understand the level of variability in crime concentration across cities, the useful theoretical insight one can glean from the proposed law of crime concentration is that researchers need to use a wider geographic lens in understanding the geographic distribution of crime.

We acknowledge some limitations to this study. First, we limited our study to only cities in southern California. Although the law of crime concentration makes the fundamental claim that it will be observed in all locations, we may be detecting scope conditions regarding a type of area in which it does not hold. Second, we also were limited to data over a relatively short period at one particular point in time (2005–2012). Although this did allow us to observe these cities over a number of years, and the law of crime concentration presumably is invariant over epochs, this should be kept in mind as researchers move forward in exploring why crime concentrates more in some cities compared to others.

We believe the study of the amount of crime concentration across cities is very valuable. We found evidence of distinct differences across cities, and we believe this opens up an area of research to understand why the level of concentration varies across cities. We have highlighted the challenge of deﬁning the temporal stability assumption that is employed when measuring crime concentration, and how this can impact the conclusions that are drawn in such studies. As researchers compare concentration across cities of different spatial scales, care must be taken when striking a balance between the conceptual problem of deﬁning crime too broadly and the statistical problem of measuring concentration when there are relatively few events. Nonetheless, we believe the variability in crime concentration across cities is a useful avenue to explore, and it may force micro and macro geographic theories of crime to seriously consider each other.

Acknowledgments This research is supported in part by NIJ Grant 2012-R2-CX-0010.

Appendix

See Tables 7, 8, 9, 10.

Table 7Summary statistics for the cities in the analyses (based on various population thresholds)

VariableCities with population at least 40,000Cities with population at least 10,000Cities with population at least 100,000

MeanSDMinMaxMeanSDMinMaxMeanSDMinMax

Population174,496480,99040,0753,772,48690,095329,68310,1043,772,486403,813811,240102,7233,772,486

Avg HH income83,18224,80445,586155,67186,42134,52242,917236,37077,33914,50246,482113,185

Avg home value168,37677,28363,203414,558175,47095,00551,557486,417151,48159,81879,784275,861

% Latino41.525.09.097.840.326.62.798.547.021.29.097.8

% Poverty11.75.92.328.711.36.31.630.113.34.77.024.1

% Unemployed9.02.44.816.49.63.64.832.89.91.86.713.0

% Black5.36.50.132.95.39.90.087.05.55.30.218.6

% aged 15–2922.13.412.828.422.16.80.677.623.72.619.128.4

% Asian13.614.70.263.110.713.40.063.110.27.50.838.1

Ethnic heterogeneity51.913.94.471.748.215.33.073.556.114.24.469.8

Avg length of residence9.92.65.315.810.42.81.418.99.01.86.613.4

% with bachelor’s28.816.43.865.527.817.73.473.825.313.15.465.5

N428216

Table 8 Crime counts for cities in analyses Year Agg. assault Robbery Burglary M.V. theft Larceny Total

- 2005 Mean 281.2 155.0 416.0 459.1 993.1 1816.6 S.D. 1192.1 966.8 1841.6 2167.4 4931.8 9874.3 Min 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Max 12,538.6 10,317.1 19,541.7 22,850.4 52,448.9 118,118.2
- 2006 Mean 279.3 174.2 432.6 447.0 988.4 1829.7 S.D. 1109.1 1050.5 1724.8 2003.7 4607.9 9337.0 Min 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Max 11,613.2 11,208.6 18,161.2 21,177.3 49,033.8 111,618.8
- 2007 Mean 255.5 165.1 467.4 494.2 1135.4 2504.4 S.D. 928.5 891.0 1642.6 1990.9 4554.1 9888.8 Min 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Max 10,578.1 10,506.8 18,072.7 20,060.1 49,800.6 109,388.6
- 2008 Mean 270.0 165.9 470.3 447.0 962.2 2303.3 S.D. 966.6 937.4 1694.1 1871.5 2995.0 8312.1 Min 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Max 10,641.4 11,074.6 18,694.3 19,928.4 28,521.3 89,222.5
- 2009 Mean 239.3 151.1 427.8 354.7 885.0 2046.9 S.D. 821.8 833.7 1527.0 1470.0 2684.7 7219.5 Min 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Max 8838.2 9836.6 16,963.0 15,941.7 26,686.0 78,543.1
- 2010 Mean 225.0 132.6 412.8 326.2 865.5 1951.0 S.D. 735.3 745.0 1447.7 1347.9 2571.1 6729.7 Min 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Max 7801.8 8808.2 16,098.0 14,792.5 25,532.2 73,298.2
- 2011 Mean 187.7 118.5 397.3 302.2 817.4 1812.6 S.D. 683.5 698.8 1458.4 1288.8 2501.2 6505.7 Min 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Max 7490.8 8278.0 16,415.8 14,075.5 24,184.1 70,713.3
- 2012 Mean 193.4 115.0 357.9 307.9 764.5 1549.9 S.D. 694.0 664.5 1467.7 1342.0 2751.8 6459.5 Min 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Max 7056.7 7424.5 15,580.4 13,578.6 25,079.1 68,996.6


Table 9Crime clustering for cities, by ﬁve types of crime

Aggravated assaultRobberyBurglary

ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)

20074221.715.90.080.04040.324.30.0100.04231.615.50.087.3

Average69.218.630.5100.086.016.746.7100.051.415.716.0100.0

Average95.110.258.7100.097.66.770.0100.075.217.844.3100.0

20125965.918.60.0100.05786.416.150.9100.06147.918.50.0100.0

20053996.59.065.7100.03697.57.769.2100.03980.918.544.4100.0

20125997.27.267.4100.05799.13.383.3100.06174.319.144.1100.0

20053971.219.541.2100.03687.217.151.0100.03952.415.222.2100.0

20064370.320.241.3100.04087.316.550.2100.04254.317.824.3100.0

20077468.617.926.3100.07185.816.448.9100.07352.514.88.6100.0

20087569.117.333.7100.06784.516.746.2100.07352.814.625.0100.0

20097569.317.933.3100.07185.716.649.5100.07451.114.910.7100.0

20107768.718.837.5100.07185.716.641.2100.07650.715.124.1100.0

20117970.418.730.8100.07585.117.735.4100.07649.414.913.3100.0

20064395.010.562.3100.04096.29.366.0100.04275.619.143.1100.0

20077494.311.354.5100.07196.88.065.3100.07373.617.041.3100.0

20087593.212.252.1100.06796.98.067.5100.07374.917.445.5100.0

20097594.411.547.6100.07197.37.264.4100.07475.017.046.7100.0

20107794.810.163.9100.07198.36.067.2100.07673.716.943.1100.0

20117995.510.055.8100.07598.94.076.8100.07673.417.146.2100.0

20053828.916.30.0100.03535.920.80.085.73840.617.011.1100.0

20064121.015.50.090.93832.723.60.0100.04033.418.80.0100.0

Percent of crime in segments in top 5 % of crime over all years (historically adjusted concentration)

Percent of crime in segments in top 5 % of crime in prior year (temporally adjusted concentration)

Percent of crime in segments in top 5 % of crime in current year (unadjusted concentration)

ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)

ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)

Average83.818.245.0100.069.313.943.4100.061.815.236.1100.0

20117827.318.60.0100.07435.020.30.0100.07531.315.40.0100.0

20054285.218.950.8100.04273.315.750.7100.04366.316.843.2100.0

20064382.419.445.8100.04670.715.945.1100.04763.918.737.8100.0

20077379.618.440.5100.07667.213.839.6100.07760.314.534.4100.0

20087582.318.441.8100.07868.014.141.1100.07961.015.033.4100.0

20097585.118.042.0100.07768.713.241.8100.07860.714.134.3100.0

20107684.517.844.5100.07868.512.538.5100.07960.414.035.0100.0

20117785.417.746.9100.07968.013.044.4100.08060.213.834.5100.0

20126285.917.247.5100.06269.913.346.0100.06361.614.935.9100.0

20054260.321.90.0100.04259.116.530.1100.04355.816.831.4100.0

20064361.518.532.2100.04661.418.722.5100.04757.319.025.2100.0

20077359.715.731.8100.07657.615.720.3100.07754.415.322.2100.0

20087561.116.431.8100.07859.016.523.2100.07955.216.817.3100.0

Average26.416.70.090.636.120.40.090.732.315.21.496.2

20107626.814.50.064.37039.519.90.0100.07430.313.10.096.0

20087528.817.50.0100.06738.017.80.083.77332.414.20.098.2

20097429.917.30.0100.07035.018.40.072.77332.412.30.091.1

20125926.718.20.090.05732.418.50.083.36026.415.20.096.9

Motor vehicle theftLarcenyTotal crime

Aggravated assaultRobberyBurglary

Percent of crime in segments in top 5 % of crime over all years (historically adjusted concentration)

Percent of crime in segments in top 5 % of crime in current year (unadjusted concentration)

ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)ObsMean (%)SD (%)Min (%)Max (%)

Motor vehicle theftLarcenyTotal crime

Average59.917.720.5100.058.616.220.3100.054.516.121.7100.0

20107531.416.90.0100.07647.814.512.1100.07746.514.45.8100.0

20097559.216.420.0100.07759.315.127.5100.07854.515.520.1100.0

20107658.315.927.9100.07858.915.220.7100.07953.915.223.3100.0

20117758.717.70.0100.07957.915.218.4100.08053.415.518.0100.0

20126260.618.920.6100.06256.016.80.0100.06351.515.016.1100.0

20097435.717.30.0100.07646.516.00.095.17746.115.20.0100.0

Average32.116.20.090.146.416.13.797.345.114.90.796.9

20054131.418.10.0100.04148.917.00.0100.04247.815.80.097.6

20117631.116.70.095.87846.814.911.5100.07944.913.80.096.9

20126128.215.40.081.86146.717.25.7100.06243.114.60.096.6

20064032.618.00.096.24344.018.30.095.54343.616.20.096.0

20074131.214.50.078.64445.016.10.092.84544.014.90.093.2

20087534.813.00.068.07645.414.60.095.37744.814.30.095.4

Percent of crime in segments in top 5 % of crime in prior year (temporally adjusted concentration)

Using all cities with at least 10,000 population

Table 10 The 42 cities with at least 40,000 population

Alhambra Aliso Viejo Anaheim Baldwin Park Burbank Carlsbad Chula Vista Colton Corona Downey El Cajon Encinitas Escondido Fontana Huntington Beach Irvine La Mesa Laguna Niguel Lake Elsinore Lake Forest Los Angeles Mission Viejo Montebello Moreno Valley National City Oceanside Palm Desert Perris Poway Rancho Santa Margarita Redondo Beach Riverside San Buenaventura (Ventura) San Clemente San Diego San Marcos Santa Ana Santa Monica Santee Temecula Vista Yorba Linda

References

Andresen MA, Curman ASN, Linning SJ (2016) The trajectories of crime at places: understanding the patterns of disaggregated crime types. J Quant Criminol. doi:10.1007/s10940-016-9301-1 Braga AA, Papachristos AV, Hureau DM (2010) The concentration and stability of gun violence at micro places in Boston, 1980–2008. J Quant Criminol 26:33–53 Curman ASN, Andresen MA, Brantingham PJ (2014) Crime and place: a longitudinal examination of street segment patterns in Vancouver, BC. J Quant Criminol 31:127–147

Eck J, Gersh J, Taylor C (2000) Finding crime hot spots through repeat address mapping. In: Mollenkopf J, Ross T (eds) Analyzing crime patterns: frontiers of practice. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks Gorr WL, Lee YJ (2014) Early warning system for temporary crime hot spots. J Quant Criminol 31:25–47 Groff ER, Weisburd D, Yang SM (2010) Is it important to examine crime trends at a local ‘‘micro’’ level?: a

longitudinal analysis of street to street variability in crime trajectories. J Quant Criminol 26:7–32

Grubesic TH, Mack EA (2008) Spatio-temporal interaction of urban crime. J Quant Criminol 24:285–306 Hipp JR, Roussell A (2013) Micro- and Macro-environment population and the consequences for crime

rates. Soc Forces 92:563–595 Hipp JR, Tita GE, Boggess LN (2011) A new twist on an old approach: a random-interaction approach for estimating rates of inter-group interaction. J Quant Criminol 27:27–51 Kemp AW, Kemp CD (1990) A composition-search algorithm for low-parameter Poisson generation. J Stat

Comput Simul 35:239–244 Kemp CD, Kemp AW (1991) Poisson random variate generation. Appl Stat 40:143–158 Levin A, Rosenfeld R, Deckard MJ (2015) Using quantitative methods to explore measures of crime

concentration in a large city. American Society of Criminology, Washington, D.C. Muthe´n B, Muthe´n LK (2000) Integrating person-centered and variable-centered analyses: growth mixture modeling with latent trajectory classes. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 24:882–891 Nagin DS (1999) Analyzing developmental trajectories: a semiparametric, group-based approach. Psychol Methods 4:139–157 Quetelet LAJ 1969 (1842). A treatise on man: and the development of his faculties. Scholars’ Facsimiles &

Reprints, Gainesville Sherman LW (1995) Hot spots of crime and criminal careers of places. Crime Place 4:35–52 Sherman L, Gartin P, Buerger M (1989) Hot spots of predatory crime: routine activities and the criminology

of place. Criminology 27:27–56 Spelman W (1995) Criminal careers of public places. In: Eck JE, Weisburd D (eds) Crime and place. Criminal Justice Press, Monsey Steenbeek W, Weisburd D (2016) Where the action is in crime? An examination of variability of crime across different spatial units in The Hague, 2001–2009. J Quant Criminol 32(3):449–469

Weisburd D (2015) The law of crime concentration and the criminology of place. Criminology 53:133–157 Weisburd D, Amram S (2014) The law of concentrations of crime at place: the case of Tel Aviv-Jaffa. Police

Pract Res 15:101–114 Weisburd D, Mazerolle LG (2000) Crime and disorder in drug hot spots: implications for theory and practice in policing. Police Q 3:331–349 Weisburd D, Bushway S, Lum C, Yang SM (2004) Trajectories of crime at places: a longitudinal study of street segments in the city of Seattle. Criminology 42:283–321 Weisburd D, Groff E, Yang SM (2012) The criminology of place. Oxford University Press, New York

