J Quant Criminol (2017) 33:635–647 DOI 10.1007/s10940-016-9332-7

ORIGINAL PAPER

The Law of Crime Concentration: An Application and Recommendations for Future Research

Aaron Levin1 • Richard Rosenfeld1 • Michael Deckard1

Published online: 7 December 2016 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2016

Abstract

Objective We address four outstanding empirical questions related to the ‘‘law of crime concentration’’ (Weisburd in Criminology 53:133–157, 2015): (1) Is the spatial concentration of crime stable over time? (2) Do the same places consistently rank among those with the highest crime counts? (3) How much crime concentration would be observed if crimes were distributed randomly over place? (4) To what degree does the spatial concentration of crime depend on places that are crime free?

Methods The data are annual counts of violent and property crimes in St. Louis between 2000 and 2014. Temporal stability in the spatial inequality of crime is measured by computing the fraction of crimes that occur in the 5% of street segments with the highest crime frequencies each year. The spatial mobility of crime is measured by computing the number of years each street segment appears in the top 5% of street segments. Poisson simulations are used to estimate the fraction of crimes that could appear in the top 5% of street segments on the basis of chance alone. The impact of crime-free locales on the spatial concentration of crime is evaluated by comparing results from analyses that include and exclude crime-free street segments from the crime distributions.

Results The concentration of crime is highly unequal and stable over time. The speciﬁc street segments with the highest crime frequencies, however, change over time. Nontrivial fractions of street segments may appear among the 5% with the highest crime frequencies on the basis of chance. Spatial concentration of crime is reduced when crime-free street segments are excluded from the crime distributions.

& Richard Rosenfeld richard_rosenfeld@umsl.edu Aaron Levin aslkr7@mail.umsl.edu Michael Deckard michaeljdeckard@mail.umsl.edu

1 University of Missouri – St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA

Conclusions The law of crime concentration is not a measurement artifact. Its substantive signiﬁcance, however, should be assessed in future longitudinal research that replicates the current study across diverse social settings.

Keywords Crime concentration Hot spots policing Criminology of place

Among the most rudimentary observations in criminology is that crime is unevenly distributed across space: depending on the crime type, some places have more crime and others have less. The study of the spatial distribution of crime has been enriched over the last two decades by attention to crime in urban spaces known as hot spots. The empirical foundation of hot spot research is the common observation that crimes are concentrated in a relatively small number of places within cities. In a recent address to the American Society of Criminology, Weisburd (2015) reported that several cities exhibit generally similar spatial crime distributions. He termed this empirical regularity the ‘‘law of crime concentration at place.’’

There is little doubt that crime is spatially concentrated. The degree of similarity in the spatial distribution of crime across cities that differ in size and crime rates is indeed striking. Yet, as Weisburd (2015) noted, many unanswered questions remain concerning the spatial concentration of crime. We focus on four issues with relevance for informing future research on the spatial concentration of crime: (Q1) Is the spatial concentration of crime stable over time? (Q2) Is crime consistently concentrated in the same places? (Q3) To what degree is the spatial distribution of crime subject to random variation? (Q4) Is the observed spatial distribution of crime a product of places that are effectively crime free? These are certainly not the only questions prompted by the law of crime concentration, but they call attention to logical extensions or corollaries of the law that, when evaluated empirically, establish its scope conditions—the limits within which its claims are assumed to hold. We address the four research questions in an analysis of the distribution of violent and property crimes across street segments in St. Louis between 2000 and 2014.

In the current study, we use the street segment as the operational deﬁnition of ‘‘place’’. Prior studies have deﬁned place in a number of ways based on different units of analysis. Weisburd et al. (2016) maintain that deference should generally be given to the smallest units possible when choosing the unit of analysis, as these can always be aggregated to larger units (see, also, Clarke and Eck 2007; Eck et al. 2007; Madensen and Eck 2008). Because the exact address of a crime event is often unknown or ambiguous, aggregating addresses to street segments also mitigates issues of approximation (Weisburd et al. 2016).

Inequality and Mobility in the Spatial Distribution of Crime

A remarkable degree of stability characterizes the concentration of crime across cities that differ in size, crime rates, and other features (Weisburd et al. 2012, 2016). Weisburd (2015) has dubbed this phenomenon the law of crime concentration at place, and there is strong evidence for its robustness. For example, Sherman et al. (1989), Pierce et al. (1988), Spelman (1995), Weisburd et al. (2004), and Curman et al. (2015) all found that 50–60% of crimes (or calls for service) occurred at the most crime-ridden 5% of micro geographies in otherwise diverse urban settings. Akin to the prominent ‘‘5–50’’ rule in the distribution of

crime among individuals (Wolfgang et al. 1972), the law of crime concentration at place is likely to achieve widespread acceptance in criminology.

While extensive prior research conﬁrms that crimes are unequally distributed in space, fewer studies have examined the stability of crime concentration over time. The existing research, however, points to impressive temporal stability. Weisburd et al. (2012) found that 50% of crime events occurred at 5% of street segments in Seattle every year over a 14-year period (see, also, Groff et al. 2010; Weisburd et al. 2009). Braga et al. (2010, 2011) obtained similar results in studies of robberies and ﬁrearm assaults in Boston (see, also, Spellman 1995). Andresen et al. (2016) also found appreciable temporal stability in the spatial concentration of property crimes in Vancouver, although the degree of temporal stability was greater for some crimes than others. The ﬁrst objective of the current study is to contribute to this growing body of literature in an assessment of temporal stability in the concentration of violent and property crimes in St. Louis.

Our second research question about the law of crime concentration may seem similar to the ﬁrst, but in fact the two questions direct attention to quite distinct properties of the spatial distribution of crime. The fraction of crimes that occur in places where crime is heavily concentrated can be computed and compared over multiple time periods, characterizing the degree of spatial inequality in the distribution. Alternatively, we may also ask whether the same places consistently rank at the top of the distribution over time to assess the degree of spatial mobility in the distribution.1 High levels of spatial inequality may or may not coincide with high rates of spatial mobility. Fifty percent of the crimes may consistently occur in just 5% of places, for example, even if few places consistently rank in the top 5%.

Consider the implications of the distinction between spatial inequality and spatial mobility for hot spot policing strategies that target places where crimes are highly concentrated. All such strategies assume that crimes are unequally distributed across space, and research showing that spatial inequality is stable over time is clearly helpful for efﬁciently allocating scarce enforcement resources to crime hot spots. But more information is needed if the police want to target places that are chronically hot. Simply knowing that the spatial distribution of crime is always uneven is not sufﬁcient for informing this strategy. The police must have information on the spatial mobility of crime, speciﬁcally the degree to which crimes remain heavily concentrated in the same places and for how long. Prior research offers much less guidance on this issue (Gorr and Lee 2015). Nor is it clear, at least in its initial formulation (Weisburd 2015), just how much spatial mobility the law of crime concentration might allow. The second objective of the current study is to build on prior research by determining the extent to which the same places consistently rank among the most crime prone St. Louis street segments over a 15-year period.

Random Variation in the Spatial Distribution of Crime

Park and Eck (2013) maintain that the random component in the distribution of criminal victimization has not been adequately modeled in studies of repeat victimization. As a result, nonrandom processes have been overestimated, including risk heterogeneity (some individuals are more vulnerable to victimization than others) and event dependence (prior

- 1 The distinction is similar to that between inequality and mobility in the distribution of income (e.g., Fields and Ok 1999; Piketty 2000).


victimization increases the risk of future victimization). Ignoring the random component in repeat victimization, Park and Eck (2013) advise, can lead to wasteful and ineffective policy interventions. The authors point out that the same is true of ‘‘the interpretation of locational crime concentration and allocation of crime prevention resources’’ (412–413).

That the spatial concentration of crime is nonrandom is a logical corollary of the law of crime concentration; law-like processes should not be due to simple chance. Prior studies of the spatial distribution of crime have found that crimes are ‘‘over-dispersed,’’ that is, the observed spatial variance in crime departs signiﬁcantly from chance (e.g., Braga and Bond 2008; Sherman et al. 1989; Sorg et al. 2013). These are valuable results, but it is equally important for explanatory and policy purposes to know the extent of crime concentration if crimes were randomly distributed over place.

Park and Eck (2013) recommended that investigators explicitly model the random component in victimization and repeat victimization before concluding that the nonrandom component, even if statistically discernible, is substantively meaningful. The same considerations apply to the analysis of crime events across urban spaces. In the current study, we build on the Poisson simulations by Sherman et al. (1989) and Park and Eck (2013) in an analysis of random variation in crimes over St. Louis street segments.

Crime Concentration and Crime-Free Places

Finally, if the spatial distribution of crime is to some degree randomly generated, prior research indicates that it is also highly truncated. A large fraction of urban spaces experience no crime over lengthy time periods. Curman et al. (2015) found, for example, that 40% of the street segments in Vancouver did not experience a single crime in 16 years. As shown below, the current study yields similar results for St. Louis. The measurement of crime concentration in prior research, however, generally encompasses all spatial units, regardless of whether they have experienced any crime. That does not necessarily invalidate the measure of crime concentration commonly used in the hot spot research literature. But it should prompt researchers to ask, for a given research question, whether spatial crime concentration—the empirical foundation of hot spot analysis and associated enforcement strategies—is appropriately measured when places with no crime are included in the data.

When there are fewer places than there are crimes, there will always be places without any crime (Sherman et al. 1989). Moreover, the absence of crime from a large fraction of places over an extensive period of time is itself evidence of appreciable crime concentration in a city (Andresen et al. 2016). The question remains, however, whether crimes are spatially concentrated in those places where crimes actually occur. Answering that question requires a separate analysis of crime-prone places. Consider two spatial distributions with identical degrees of crime concentration. In one, half of the street segments are crime free, whereas in the other just 10% are crime free. It follows that crimes must be more equally distributed among the remaining street segments—those with a non-zero probability of experiencing crime—in the former than in the latter distribution. This possibility has important implications for evaluating crime concentration in the two settings, but it would be overlooked if crime concentration is measured on the basis of all street segments, regardless of whether they have experienced any crime.

For some purposes, researchers may want to analyze the spatial concentration of places with little or no crime of a speciﬁc type. Such ‘‘cold spots’’ are no less important than hot

spots for explaining the spatial concentration of crime. But if the purpose is to explain or control crime in hot spots, researchers should determine whether including crime-free places in the analysis yields a different picture of the degree to which crime is spatially concentrated than that produced when restricting the analysis to crime-prone places. As Andresen et al. (2016) demonstrate in their analysis of the spatial distribution of property crimes in Vancouver, the best way to answer that empirical question is to compare the results of analyses based on both approaches. Using different methods, we address this issue with violent and property crime data from St. Louis.

Data and Methods

The annual crime data for the current study are from the St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department (SLMPD) for the period 2000–2014. The analyses are conducted on violent crimes (sum of homicides, rapes, robberies, aggravated assaults) and property crimes (sum of burglaries, larcenies, and motor vehicle thefts). The SLMPD recorded 101,089 violent crimes and 489,490 property crimes between 2000 and 2014. The crimes are aggregated to the street segment where they occurred, deﬁned here as the two sides of a street between intersections. Crimes occurring at intersections are allocated to the adjoining street segments according to the length of the segments (i.e., longer segments are weighted more heavily). The city of St. Louis has 16,056 street segments, yielding over 240,000 segmentlevel observations during the 15-year study period.

Throughout our analysis, we use the percentage of crimes occurring in the 5% of street segments with the highest crime counts as our working measure of crime concentration. The 5% threshold is commonly used in prior research (Weisburd 2015; Pierce et al. 1988; Sherman et al. 1989). To measure spatial inequality, we compute the percentage of crimes occurring in the top 5% of the 16,056 street segments (n = 803), and repeat it each year for each crime measure from 2000 to 2014. The results reveal the degree of concentration and whether the concentration is stable over time. To measure spatial mobility, we compute the number of years that each street segment appears in the top 5% of the violent and property crime distributions, based on the crime count per segment that most closely approximates the 95th percentile of each (C3 violent crimes, C7 property crimes per year). Most street segments never make it over this threshold, and it is unclear how consistently the same areas must rank at the top of the distributions to conform to the law of crime concentration. We therefore explore various cut points for determining the fraction of St. Louis street segments that qualify as the ‘‘high-chronic’’ type (see Weisburd et al. 2012).

We use a multi-step simulation process to determine the degree of randomness in the spatial concentration of crime. We begin by ﬁnding the mean number of crimes per street segment in each year (yt). This value is entered as the parameter into a random number generator, which produces integer values from the Poisson distribution with a mean of yt for each of the 16,056 street segments across the city, assuming the crimes were distributed randomly. We then calculate the percentage of incidents that occurred in the top 5% (803 segments) of this simulated distribution. This process is repeated ten times to stabilize the error variance.

The ten estimates are averaged to produce a single estimate of the fraction of crimes that would fall in the top 5% of the distribution, for each crime type in each year, if the crimes were distributed randomly across street segments. Because the empirical means of the crime distributions likely reﬂect both random and nonrandom processes in the data, we

cannot use the results of the randomization procedure to partition the crime distributions into a random and nonrandom component.2 Rather, the results offer an indication of the degree of random variation that could plausibly characterize a crime distribution with a speciﬁed empirical mean.

Finally, we have argued that researchers should carefully consider the extent to which their measures of crime concentration depend on the presence in the distribution of places with a negligible probability of experiencing a crime. In the current study we compare the percentage of crimes that fall in the top 5% of the violent and property crime distributions with crime-free street segments included in and excluded from the data. It should be noted that our revised method for computing crime concentration is based on a permissive criterion for excluding cases. It would be reasonable to exclude street segments that, for example, experienced at least two (or three or ﬁve) crimes over the 15-year observation period or even one crime each year. Our method, therefore, should be viewed as a conservative test of the proposition that the inclusion of places with a low probability of experiencing crime can have a substantively important effect on the observed degree of crime concentration.

Results

We present the results of our analyses in the order of the research questions under consideration. We ﬁrst report the results pertaining to inequality and mobility in the distribution of violent and property crimes across the 16,056 St. Louis street segments. We then present ﬁndings on the degree to which the concentration of crimes in the top 5% of the distribution is due to a random process. Finally, we compare the degree of crime concentration that is observed when crime-free street segments are included in and excluded from the denominator of the 5% concentration measure.

Spatial Inequality

The law of crime concentration stipulates that crimes are heavily concentrated in a small proportion of urban spaces. The law also implies that the pronounced concentration of crime should remain constant, or nearly so, over time. We ﬁnd strong evidence in support of both propositions in our analysis. Figure 1 displays the percentage of violent and property crimes observed in the 5% of street segments with the highest violent and property crime frequencies between 2000 and 2014. Two important results emerge. First, on average, both violent and property crimes are strongly concentrated in the top 5% of street segments, with violent crimes somewhat more concentrated than property crimes. Second, the degree of spatial concentration in both offense types is very stable over time. The percentage of violent crimes in the top 5% of street segments over the 15-year period varies from a minimum of 51.8% to a maximum of 61.3%. Temporal stability in the concentration of property crimes is even stronger (min = 38.2%, max = 41.6%; see Appendix, Table 2). These results indicate that the spatial distribution of crime in St. Louis is both highly unequal and stable over time.

- 2 We thank the anonymous reviewers of a previous draft for this insight.


80%

## Violent Property

Mean = 54.7% Sd = 2.6%

Mean 39.1% Sd = 1.0%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014

- Fig. 1 Percentage of violent and property crimes in the top 5% of street segments, 2000–2014

- 0%
- 1%
- 2%
- 3%
- 4%
- 5%
- 6%
- 7%
- 8%
- 9%
- 10%


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Violent Property

Years

- Fig. 2 Percentage of street segments in the top 5% by number of years, 2000–2014


Spatial Mobility

The spatial mobility results are more complicated. There is substantial drag in the distribution of crime over time, with roughly three-quarters of the 16,056 street segments never appearing in the top 5% of the segments with the highest frequency of violent and property crimes (see Appendix, Table 3). The candidates for the top 5%, then, are limited to the remaining one-quarter of street segments that made it into the top 5% at least once during the 15-year observation period.

As shown in Fig. 2, however, very few of these places consistently appear in the top 5%. For example, 664 of the street segments (4.1% of the total) ranked in the top 5% of the

violent crime distribution and 1511 (9.4%) of the segments placed in the top 5% of the property crime distribution for more than 5 of the 15 years. The number of street segments making it over the 5% threshold for more than 10 of the 15 years is only 129 (0.8%) for violent crime and 528 (3.3%) for property crime. If consistency is deﬁned as placing in the top 5% of the street segments in all 15 years, then of the 16,056 street segments, only two in the violent crime distribution and 94 (0.59%) of the segments in the property crime distribution would qualify. In summary, while approximately 40–50% of crimes are consistently concentrated in the top 5% of St. Louis street segments, the spatial composition of this high-crime category changes considerably from year to year.

Random Variation

Crime is a rare event. We should expect to observe that more than 5% of crimes will occur in the top 5% of street segments on the basis of chance alone. The results of our randomization exercise, shown in Table 1, reveal that about 26% of all violent crimes and 14% of all property crimes could have appeared in the top 5% of street segments by chance. Random events are, by deﬁnition, unpredictable. That could be a reason why we ﬁnd relatively few street segments that consistently rank in the top 5% (see Fig. 2). These results suggest that future research on the law of crime concentration should not only test for the presence of over-dispersion in an observed spatial distribution of crime, but should also estimate the degree to which crimes could have been unequally distributed over space by chance.

Crime-Free Places

The conventional method for measuring the concentration of crime across places is based on all places in the jurisdiction, regardless of whether they have experienced a crime

- Table 1 Simulated percentage of crimes in the top 5% of street segments, 2000–2014


Violent crime Property crime

- 2000 24.5 12.3
- 2001 24.6 12.1
- 2002 25.3 12.3
- 2003 26.2 12.3
- 2004 26.3 12.8
- 2005 23.3 12.8
- 2006 22.6 12.4
- 2007 24.1 13.4
- 2008 25.1 13.8
- 2009 24.7 13.9
- 2010 28.2 14.1
- 2011 29.1 14.6
- 2012 30.0 15.9
- 2013 31.1 16.7
- 2014 30.1 16.0 Mean 26.3 13.7 Sd 2.7 1.5


recorded by the police. We used this method to compute the percentage of crimes in the top 5% of St. Louis street segments shown in Fig. 1. The conventional measure of crime concentration will be inﬂated by the zeros in the distribution. We ﬁnd that to be the case in the spatial distribution of violent crimes and, to a lesser degree, property crimes in St. Louis.

Over 40% of the St. Louis street segments (6589/16,056) did not experience a single violent crime recorded by the police between 2000 and 2014. Nearly one-quarter of the street segments (3808/16,056) experienced no property crimes recorded by the police during the 15-year period. We recomputed the crime concentration measures with these crime-free segments omitted from the distributions. We ﬁnd that approximately 40% of violent crimes appear in the top 5% of street segments when the crime-free segments are excluded, compared with 55% when they are included. Therefore, the omission of the crime-free segments results in about a 27% reduction in the degree of spatial concentration in violent crimes. The inclusion of crime-free street segments has less of an impact on the fraction of property crimes that place in the top 5% of street segments. About 39% of property crimes are found in the top 5% of all street segments, compared with about 33% when the crime-free segments are excluded. Therefore, omitting the crime-free segments produces about a 15% reduction in the observed degree of spatial concentration in property crimes.3

These results do not invalidate the law of crime concentration. A small proportion of places still accounts for a relatively large proportion of crimes even when the measure of crime concentration is restricted to places with a non-negligible probability of experiencing a crime. It should be recalled, however, that the results presented here are based on a permissive inclusion criterion: just one crime in 15 years. We would likely have found larger discrepancies in the degree of crime concentration had we used a somewhat more restrictive inclusion criterion, such as at least one crime per year. Even this conservative test, however, results in non-trivial reductions in crime concentration when reliably crimefree places are omitted from the measurement base. These results, along with those presented above, should inform future research intended to measure the degree of crime concentration in small urban spaces.

Discussion

The primary objective of the current study has been to probe some of the outstanding empirical questions and implications related to the law of crime concentration. The law states that crimes are disproportionately concentrated in a small fraction of street segments or other micro geographies across cities (Weisburd 2015). A logical corollary of the law of crime concentration is that crimes are not only spatially concentrated across places but over time as well. We found this to be the case for violent and property crimes in St. Louis. What we have termed inequality in the spatial distribution of crime was very nearly constant over a 15-year observation period. The current research, therefore, supports the fundamental premise of the law of crime concentration.

As Weisburd (2015) points out, unanswered questions remain with respect to other empirical implications of the law of crime concentration. We investigated three additional questions in this study: Are crimes consistently concentrated in the same places, or does the mix of places with the most crime change over time? To what extent could the spatial

- 3 The data used to generate these results are available from the authors on request.


concentration of crime have been randomly generated? Does the degree of spatial concentration of crime depend on crime-free places? These are not the only questions raised by the law of crime concentration, but they are important considerations for implementing and interpreting the law in research, policy, and practice.

We found both low and high levels of mobility over time in the spatial distribution of crime in St. Louis. Between 2000 and 2014, roughly three-quarters of the 16,056 street segments in the city never appeared among the 5% of segments with the highest crime frequencies. This result is consistent with prior research showing that most urban places exhibit low and stable crime trajectories over time (Curman et al. 2015; Weisburd et al. 2004). On the other hand, street segments that did appear in the top 5% at least once during the 15-year period, did not remain at the top for very long. For example, while about 25% of the street segments made it over the 5% threshold for violent crimes at least once, only about 4% remained there for more than 5 years, and less than 1% ranked at or above the 95th percentile for more than 10 years. In other words, we found considerable mobility into and out of the category of places with the highest crime frequencies over the 15-year observation window.

These results on spatial mobility in crime do not necessarily contradict the law of crime concentration, because the law does not specify how much spatial mobility should be expected. In addition, although it is commonly used in the literature, the 5% threshold is a rather exacting standard for measuring crime concentration. Had we used a lower threshold, we might have found somewhat less spatial mobility in high-crime places. Finally, there are a few places that do consistently appear among the 5% with the most crime. These ‘‘high chronic’’ places should be prime targets of enforcement strategies aimed at reducing crime in areas where crime rates are persistently high. Locating such places and distinguishing them from those where crimes are highly concentrated intermittently will require longitudinal research designs that capture crime events over an extended time period.

The results of the current study also reveal that a sizable fraction of places may appear among the most crime ridden on the basis of chance alone. We have suggested that could be one reason why the mix of street segments in the most crime prone category shifts over time. We assume that the law of crime concentration does not apply to random events. Therefore, research intended to inform place-based enforcement strategies should not only conﬁrm that an observed frequency distribution of crime is over-dispersed, but should also estimate the potential degree of random variation in crimes over place, especially for crimes that are relatively rare.

Finally, our results suggest that future research should give serious consideration to whether the measure of crime concentration is based on all places or is limited to those with a non-negligible probability of experiencing a crime known to the police. We have shown that even a permissive deﬁnition of hot spot candidates—one crime in 15 yearscan make a difference in the degree of crime concentration that is observed, particularly for comparatively rare violent offenses. How spatial crime concentration is measured should depend on the research issue at hand. Research intended to disclose the attributes of places where crime rarely occurs should be based on data for relatively crime-free spatial units, as well as those where crime occurs with some regularity. Research on places where crime occurs with repeated frequency, however, should disclose how the inclusion of relatively crime-free places affects the observed degree of crime concentration. The best way to make that determination is to measure spatial crime concentration using alternative crime frequency thresholds.

These research recommendations assume that the city of St. Louis, the site of the current research, does not differ in relevant respects from other large cities. The fact that the observed degree of spatial crime concentration in St. Louis is consistent with the results from other jurisdictions offers prima facie evidence that our analyses of crime mobility, the random variation in the spatial distribution of crime, and the impact of alternative measurement strategies on crime concentration may produce similar results when applied elsewhere.

Perhaps the most important recommendation to emerge from the current study is to pay close attention to the data generating process in studies of the spatial distribution of crime, speciﬁcally to the dependence of research results on the methods used to model that process (see Hope and Norris 2013). That task does not necessarily require the application of complex statistical tests, but it should be guided by careful statistical reasoning, which has been deﬁned as ‘‘a tool for the purpose of distinguishing between methodological constructions and substantive representations’’ (Hope 2015: 6). The law of crime concentration is not a mere methodological artifact. Its substantive signiﬁcance and limiting conditions, however, should be determined by future research based on multiple methods to model the spatial distribution of crime in diverse social settings. The current study is an initial step in that direction.

Acknowledgements Funding was provided by National Institute of Justice (US) (2012-IJ-CX-0042).

Appendix

See Tables 2 and 3.

- Table 2 Violent and property crimes in top 5% of street segments, 2000–2014 (data for Fig. 1)


Violent crime Property crime

- 2000 3889/7397 = 52.58% 16,569/43,087 = 38.45%
- 2001 3987/7384 = 54.00% 16,905/44,141 = 38.30%
- 2002 3918/7107 = 55.13% 16,602/42,935 = 38.67%
- 2003 3511/6679 = 51.79% 16,498/42,736 = 38.60%
- 2004 3622/6735 = 53.78% 14,398/36,269 = 39.70%
- 2005 4220/8005 = 52.72% 14,144/36,367 = 38.89%
- 2006 4425/8489 = 52.13% 15,278/39,984 = 38.21%
- 2007 4012/7587 = 52.88% 12,866/33,160 = 38.80%
- 2008 4008/7275 = 55.09% 11,632/29,976 = 38.80%
- 2009 3918/7278 = 53.83% 11,393/29,071 = 39.19%
- 2010 3367/6129 = 54.94% 10,611/27,150 = 39.08%
- 2011 3189/5857 = 54.45% 9567/25,237 = 37.91%
- 2012 3160/5554 = 56.90% 8446/21,601 = 39.10%
- 2013 2596/4234 = 61.31% 7380/17,729 = 41.63%
- 2014 3083/5279 = 58.40% 8249/20,047 = 41.15% Mean 54.66% 39.10% Sd 2.56% 1.03%


- Table 3 Street segments in top 5% by number of years, 2000–2014 (data for Fig. 2)


Years Violent crime Property crime (C3 per year) (C7 per year) Segments % Segments %

- 0/15 years 12,264 76.38 11,716 72.97
- 1/15 years 1498 9.33 1088 6.78
- 2/15 years 718 4.47 651 4.05
- 3/15 years 403 2.51 466 2.90
- 4/15 years 297 1.85 325 2.02
- 5/15 years 212 1.32 299 1.86
- 6/15 years 167 1.04 262 1.63
- 7/15 years 147 0.92 234 1.46
- 8/15 years 98 0.61 189 1.18
- 9/15 years 67 0.42 162 1.01
- 10/15 years 56 0.35 136 0.85
- 11/15 years 51 0.32 164 1.02
- 12/15 years 34 0.21 116 0.72
- 13/15 years 25 0.16 80 0.50
- 14/15 years 17 0.11 74 0.46
- 15/15 years 2 0.01 94 0.59 Total 16,056 100.0 16,056 100.0


References

Andresen M, Linning SJ, Malleson N (2016) Crime at places and spatial concentrations: exploring the spatial stability of property crime in Vancouver BC, 2003–2013. J Quant Criminol. doi:10.1007/ s10940-016-9295-8

Braga AA, Bond BJ (2008) Policing crime and disorder hot spots: a randomized controlled trial. Criminology 46:577–607 Braga AA, Papachristos AV, Hureau DM (2010) The concentration and stability of gun violence at micro places in Boston, 1980–2008. J Quant Criminol 26:33–53

Braga AA, Hureau DM, Papachristos AV (2011) The relevance of micro places to citywide robbery trends: a longitudinal analysis of robbery incidents at street corners and block faces in Boston. J Res Crime Delinq 48:7–32

Clarke RV, Eck JE (2007) Understanding risky facilities. US Department of Justice, Ofﬁce of Community Oriented Policing Services, Washington, DC Curman Andrea S N, Andresen MA, Brantingham PJ (2015) Crime and place: a longitudinal examination of street segment patterns in Vancouver, BC. J Quant Criminol 31:127–147 Eck JE, Clarke RV, Guerette RT (2007) Risky facilities: crime concentration in homogeneous sets of establishments and facilities. Crime Prev Stud 21:225–264 Fields GS, Ok EA (1999) The measurement of income mobility: an introduction to the literature. In: Silber J (ed) Handbook of income inequality measurement. Springer, New York

Gorr WL, Lee Y (2015) Early warning system for temporary crime hot spots. J Quant Criminol 31:25–47 Groff EE, Weisburd DL, Yang S-M (2010) Is it important to examine crime trends at a local ‘‘micro’’ level?

a longitudinal analysis of street to street varaibility in crime trajectories. J Quant Criminol 26:7–32 Hope T (2015) Generating processes of the crime victimization frequency distribution, working paper. University of Salford, Salford

Hope T, Norris PA (2013) The frequency distribution of crime victimization. J Quant Criminol 29:543–578 Madensen TD, Eck JE (2008) Violence in bars: exploring the impact of place manager decision-making.

Crime Prev Community Saf 10:111–125

Park SM, Eck JE (2013) Understanding the random effect on victimization distributions: a statistical analysis of random repeat victimizations. Vict Offenders 8:399–415 Pierce GL, Spaar S, Briggs LR (1988) The Character of police work: strategic and tactical implications. Center for Applied Social Research, Northeastern University, Boston Piketty T (2000) Theories of persistent inequality and intergenerational mobility. In: Atkinson AB, Bourguignon F (eds) Handbook of income distribution, vol 1. Elsevier, Amsterdam Sherman LW, Gartin PR, Buerger ME (1989) Hot spots of predatory crime: routine activities and the criminology of place. Criminology 27(1):27–55 Sorg ET, Haberman CP, Ratcliffe JH, Groff ER (2013) Foot patrol in violent crime hot spots: the longitudinal impact of deterrence and posttreatment effects of displacement. Criminology 51(1):65–101 Spelman W (1995) Criminal careers of public places. In: Eck JE, Weisburd D (eds) Crime and place: crime prevention studies 4. Willow Tree Press, Monsey

Weisburd D (2015) The law of crime concentration and the criminology of place. Criminology 53:133–157 Weisburd D, Bushway S, Lum C, Yang S-M (2004) Trajectories of crime at places: a longitudinal study of

street segments in the city of Seattle. Criminology 42(2):283–322 Weisburd D, Eck JE, Braga AA et al (2016) Place matters: criminology for the twenty-ﬁrst century. Cambridge University Press, New York Weisburd D, Groff E, Yang SM (2012) The criminology of place: street segments and our understanding of the crime problem. Oxford University Press Weisburd D, Morris NA, Groff E (2009) Hot spots of juvenile crime: a longitudinal study of arrest incidents at street segments in Seattle, Washington. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 25(4):443–467 Wolfgang ME, Figlio RM, Sellin T (1972) Delinquency in a birth cohort. University of Chicago Press, Chicago

