J Quant Criminol (2017) 33:255–275 DOI 10.1007/s10940-016-9295-8

ORIGINAL PAPER

Crime at Places and Spatial Concentrations: Exploring the Spatial Stability of Property Crime in Vancouver BC, 2003–2013

Martin A. Andresen1 • Shannon J. Linning2 • Nick Malleson3

Published online: 24 March 2016 Springer Science+Business Media New York 2016

Abstract Objectives Investigate the spatial concentrations and spatial stability of criminal event data at the micro-spatial unit of analysis in Vancouver, British Columbia.

Methods Geo-referenced crime data, 2003–2013, representing four property crime types (commercial burglary, mischief, theft from vehicle, theft of vehicle) are analyzed considering crime concentrations at the street segment and street intersection level as well as through the use of a nonparametric spatial point pattern test that identiﬁes the stability in spatial point patterns in pairwise and longitudinal contexts.

Results Property crime in Vancouver is highly concentrated in a small percentage of street segments and intersections, as few as 5 % of street segments and intersections in 2013 depending on the crime type. The spatial point pattern test shows that spatial stability is almost always present when considering all street segments and intersections. However, when only considering the street segments and intersections that have crime, spatial stability is only present in recent years for pairwise comparisons and moderately stable in the longitudinal tests.

Conclusions Despite the crime drop that has occurred in Vancouver, there is still spatial stability present over time at levels suitable for theoretical development. However, caution must be taken when developing initiatives for situational crime prevention.

& Martin A. Andresen andresen@sfu.ca Shannon J. Linning linninsj@mail.uc.edu Nick Malleson n.s.malleson@leeds.ac.uk

- 1 Institute for Canadian Urban Research Studies and School of Criminology, Simon Fraser University, 8888 University Drive, Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6, Canada
- 2 School of Criminal Justice, University of Cincinnati, 665 Dyer Hall, P.O. Box 210389, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0389, USA
- 3 School of Geography, University of Leeds, West Yorkshire LS2 9JT, UK


Keywords Crime at places Spatial stability Spatial point pattern test

Introduction

The spatial stability of crime patterns is important for the development of theory and the application of policy. If spatial stability is not present, all data analyses are literally historical without contemporary relevance and cannot be used in a meaningful way to test/ reﬁne/develop theory or make applicable crime prevention policy.

Research in spatial criminology over the past 25 years has shown that crime is incredibly concentrated, most often having 50 % of criminal activity accounted for in 5 % of micro-places, or street segments (Sherman et al. 1989; Weisburd and Amram 2014). Though this high degree of crime concentration implies that spatial stability is present, this may not be the case; rather, crime may be highly concentrated but there still may be enough spatial shifting in the other 50 % of crime to cause problems for theory and policy.

As reviewed below, the body of research regarding crime at places and spatial concentrations of crime is growing, but this literature is still relatively new and early in its development (Weisburd 2015). Though research that investigates these phenomena in different places and at different times is important (one of the contributions of this paper), there are unanswered questions that must be investigated to advance the crime at places literature. For example, what is the importance of the spatial stability of crime patterns? There is indirect evidence for the presence of spatial stability through the use of traditional trajectory analysis, but more information is required to understand this stability. If a large percentage of any given city is ‘‘stable’’ with regard to its crime patterns, what can the lack of stability in the small percentage of that city tell us? Only when spatial stability is directly measured can such investigations be considered. Also, is the law of crime concentration at places just a manifestation of the concentration of human concentrations, in general (Weisburd 2015)? If this is the case, we should ﬁnd greater concentrations of crime where we know there are greater concentrations of human activity.

In this paper we investigate the presence of spatial stability in municipal level crime patterns in order to begin to ﬁll these gaps in the crime and place literature. We use an open source crime data set with four crime types (commercial burglary, mischief,1 theft from vehicle, and theft of vehicle) and an open source spatial point pattern test that allows for the identiﬁcation of similarity in spatial point patterns: we compare the similarity of spatial point patterns over time within each crime type. We ﬁnd that despite the signiﬁcant crime drop that has occurred in this municipality, a common phenomenon around the world over the past 25 years (Farrell et al. 2011, 2015; Tseloni et al. 2010), spatial patterns of crime and concentrations of crime have remained relatively stable. The importance of these results is discussed in the context of theoretical development and crime prevention policy.

Spatial Stability: Its Importance and Recent Evidence

Spatial stability, sometimes referred to as ecological stability, is a concept that is implicitly assumed when considering the relevance of spatial analyses of crime. This is particularly the case when researchers analyze 1 year of data, or average a small number of years of

- 1 Mischief most often represents some form of property damage or grafﬁti, but may also include disorder. This crime type is also the most sensitive to police reporting and patrol activities and should be interpreted with caution.


data. If the spatial patterns do not have spatial stability, then it is impossible to make predictions with regard to crime levels at other times or in other places. Without spatial stability, research only tells one about historical relationships.

The importance of spatial stability was recognized in the context of social disorganization theory. Shaw et al. (1929) and Shaw and McKay (1931, 1942, 1969) stated that neighborhoods maintained their relative rankings with regard to juvenile delinquency (spatial stability) despite the changes in ethnic composition over time. These researchers were able to make this claim because they had data that spanned many years. However, a lot of the research in social disorganization theory that followed did not. Because of the changing nature of cities through the process of gentriﬁcation (Lees et al. 2007), the assumption of spatial stability was difﬁcult to justify and led to social disorganization falling out of favor in criminological research (Bursik 1988). It is important to note spatial patterns may be persistent despite changes in the urban environment, this assumption could just not be tested. But does a lack of spatial stability at the neighborhood level correspond to a lack of spatial stability at micro-places? This is an important question within the crime and place literature, to test the law of crime concentration at places (Weisburd 2015).

Many years passed before a data set covering an entire city and multiple years would emerge again that could test the assumption of spatial stability. In a longitudinal study of crime patterns in Seattle, Washington, Weisburd et al. (2004) investigated the stability of crime concentrations at the street block level of analysis. Over a 14-year period, they found that one-half of the crime in Seattle occurs in 4–5 % of the street blocks and that all crime took place in approximately 50 % of the street segments. In order to investigate the spatial stability of crime patterns, Weisburd et al. (2004) used trajectory analysis at the street segment level and found that the overall majority of all trajectories generated remained relatively stable over their 14-year period. Moreover, they found that the changing crime rate trends (decreasing over time) were accounted for by only a small percentage of the street segments in Seattle.

Weisburd et al. (2009) and Groff et al. (2010) replicated the Seattle study but in speciﬁc contexts. Weisburd et al. (2009) found that juvenile crime was spatially concentrated to a greater degree than all crime analyzed by Weisburd et al. (2004):\1 % of street segments accounted for one-half of the juvenile criminal incidents in Seattle and all crime was attributed to 3–5 % of street blocks over a 14-year period. Groff et al. (2010) found strong evidence for spatial stability over a 16-year study period and found that different trajectories tended to be spatially close to one another. This is not evidence counter to spatial stability, but shows the importance of micro-spatial units of analysis.

In a 29-year longitudinal study in robberies in Boston, Massachusetts, Braga et al. (2011) found that only 12 % of street segments had one robbery incident between 1980 and 2008, and one-half of robberies in Boston occurred in 8.1 % of street blocks during that same time period—remarkable stability for such a long time period. In their temporal analyses, Braga et al. (2011) found that chronic street segments remained chronic over time, providing strong evidence for spatial stability.

In an analysis of 3 years of data spanning 10 years (1991, 1996, and 2001), Andresen and Malleson (2011) were the ﬁrst to explore multiple crime types, individually, for the same location over time. Their analyses of assault, burglary, robbery, sexual assault, theft, theft of vehicle, and theft from vehicle in Vancouver, British Columbia at three levels of analysis (census tracts, dissemination areas, and street segments) found that one-half of all crime could be accounted for by 1–8 % of street segments. Moreover, approximately onehalf of all street blocks in Vancouver experienced none of the crime types with strong

evidence that spatial crime patterns remained relatively stable throughout the years of data examined.

Most recently, Curman et al. (2015) undertook an independent replication of Weisburd et al. (2004) over a 16-year time period in Vancouver, British Columbia. In their analyses of crime, 1991–2006, Curman et al. (2015) found very similar results to that of Weisburd and colleagues: approximately 40 % of Vancouver was without any crime reported to the police and the vast majority of trajectories were classiﬁed as stable or with very little change over time.

Despite the strengths within all these studies, they are not without their limitations. First, aside from Braga et al. (2011), these more recent investigations of spatial stability have not considered criminal activity that occurs at street intersections. This is particularly problematic for Curman et al. (2015) because 25 % of the crime data had to be excluded from their study. Such a large proportion of data could change spatial patterns—according to Weisburd (2015), crime at intersections can be as low as 0 %, but as high as 33 %. Second, as evident in the actual trajectories shown in Weisburd et al. (2004) and Curman et al. (2015), though trajectories may be stable from a statistical perspective they may still be increasing or decreasing by a small degree. Consequently, over longer time periods it is still possible that actual spatial patterns are changing in meaningful ways—the spatial trajectories may actually be different. The exception to this is Andresen and Malleson (2011), but they restricted their analyses to three individual years and only considered pairwise comparisons.

In this paper, as stated above, we investigate the spatial stability of crime patterns for Vancouver, British Columbia considering four property crime types. We employ a spatial point pattern test that allows for two types of tests for spatial stability. First, year-to-year comparisons can be undertaken such that spatial stability can be compared for pairwise successive years as well as pairwise comparisons over longer time spans, 2003–2013, for example. Second, a longitudinal version of this spatial point pattern test that considers all years under analysis for the consideration of spatial stability, the spatial trajectory. This allows for a test of spatial stability that is more speciﬁc than previous research.

This more direct test of spatial stability allows for better information regarding the degree of stability and to know the degree of instability in spatial crime patterns. Additionally, through a comparison of highly concentrated human activities (commercial land use and mixed land use for the presence of commercial burglary) and more ubiquitous human activities (the presence of vehicles and their associates thefts: theft of and theft from vehicle) we can begin to know if the law of crime concentration at places is a particular manifestation of the concentrations of human activities, more generally.

Data and Methods

The City of Vancouver is contained within Metro Vancouver, collectively the third largest metropolitan area in Canada. The Vancouver Census Metropolitan Area (CMA) is the largest metropolitan area in western Canada, with a population of just over 2.3 million people. Since 1991, the Vancouver CMA has seen signiﬁcant population growth. Most often, this population growth has been linked to the 1986 World Exposition on Transportation and Communication. After this time, the Vancouver CMA has seen a lot of international investment and subsequent development. The World Exposition in 1986

brought worldwide attention to the Vancouver CMA that has only increased because of the relatively recent 2010 Winter Olympics held in this area.

With regard to crime, the Vancouver CMA has the highest level of crime rates among the three largest metropolitan areas in Canada: 6897 criminal code offences per 100,000 persons in 2013, more than double the rate in Toronto (2941 per 100,000 persons) and 70 % greater than the rate in Montreal (4072 per 100,000 persons); the same ranking was present for the violent crime rate in 2013 for Vancouver (1023 per 100,000 persons), Toronto (749 per 100,000 persons), and Montreal (903 per 100,000); and, similarly, for property crime in 2013 for Vancouver (4642 per 100,000 persons), Toronto (1936 per 100,000 persons), and Montreal (2657 per 100,000). However, it should be noted that with the international crime drop that began in the early 1990s, the reported differences in crime rates has decreased in recent years (Boyce et al. 2014; Kong 1997; Savoie 2002; Silver 2007; Wallace 2003, 2004). Overall, the crime drop in these CMAs have been of a large magnitude over the study period, 2003–2013: 47 % (Vancouver), 42 % (Toronto), and 35 % (Montreal). Needless to say, an investigation into the spatial stability of these crime patterns is in order with this substantial drop in crime for Vancouver.

Crime Data and Spatial Units of Analysis

The crime data for Vancouver are police incident data that were retrieved from the Vancouver Open Data Catalogue.2 These data contain information pertaining to location and month of occurrence of four crime types over an 11 year period, 2003–2013. The crime types include: commercial break and enter, mischief, theft from vehicle and theft of vehicle. Though this is a more restricted data set for Vancouver than used in previous analyses with regard to crime types, these data were the most current available crime data at the time of data gathering, whereas previous research using Vancouver data is almost a decade old with its most recent data point. As such, we chose to conduct a more temporally relevant analysis rather than attempting to obtain access to the older data for Vancouver.

The nature of the geographic locations provided with these data is the street intersection or the 100-block3; no speciﬁc addresses are provided because these are open data. The street intersections are easily geocoded, but these data are problematic in their raw form for geocoding the street addresses. For example, the address 123 Main Street would be provided as 1xx Main Street. Because of this, and the need to geocode the data to a street network for subsequent analysis, a random number generator was used to create a set of numbers ranging from 1 to 99. This number replaced ‘‘xx’’ in the original data ﬁle. An obvious limitation of these data and this approach for geocoding is that no inference can be made at the speciﬁc location geocoded for each criminal event. However, as discussed below, all of our analyses are undertaken at the street block level so there are no issues in regard to the ecological fallacy and inappropriate inference. With the data recoded, the geocoding hit rate percentages ranged from 96.3 to 97.1 % for all four crime types and all 11 years. This is well above the minimum acceptable hit rate of 85 % set by Ratcliffe (2004).

The spatial units of analysis for this research, as mentioned above, are street segment, or 100-blocks, and street intersections. In Vancouver, there are 11,730 street segments. Because of the presence of street intersections in our data and a desire to retain as much of

- 2 http://data.vancouver.ca/datacatalogue/crime-data.htm.
- 3 The 100-block is both sides of the street in between two intersections, the same deﬁnition for the street segments used by David Weisburd and his colleagues.


these data as possible to avoid spatial bias, street intersections were created using the street segment ﬁle. A buffer was set around the street segments in order to create overlap of the street segments—7 m was found to be sufﬁcient. This overlap was then used to create unique polygons representing intersections. The resulting total number of spatial units of analysis is 18,445: 6715 street intersections and 11,730 street segments.

In the crime and place literature, criminal events occurring at street intersections range from 0 to 33 % (Weisburd 2015). In the early years of our data, 2003–2005, criminal events at street intersections comprised of 4–6 % of the data. However, in the latter years of the data set, criminal events at street intersections comprised of 10–12 % of the data. It is important to note that these criminal events should not be considered as actually occurring within the street intersections. Rather, the street intersection is considered to be a better spatial reporting location to the ofﬁcer than a street address: a vehicle (stolen or having property stolen from it) that is parked at the intersection. In fact, there are even some commercial burglaries that occur at ‘‘intersections’’. Upon inspection of these locations, these are locations at which street vendors commonly operate. As such, these commercial burglaries are burglaries with the street vendor stand as the target. Given the notable percentage of criminal events in our data and the fact that these locations are not at random (the street intersections appear in a rather systematic manner), they should be included in the analysis in order to avoid spatial bias (Ratcliffe 2004).

Spatial Point Pattern Test

In order to assess the spatial stability of crime patterns in Vancouver, 2003–2013, a statistical technique is necessary that is able to identify any spatial change that is statistically signiﬁcant. One obvious methodology, as outlined above, is trajectory analysis. This technique allows for the identiﬁcation of different trajectories for street segments and intersections. Therefore, if the vast majority of the trajectories are stable one can assume that the crime patterns are spatially stable. But this is an assumption. However, there is another test that allows for the identiﬁcation of stability of spatial patterns, when considering multiple points in time. The spatial point pattern test developed by Andresen (2009) can be used to identify spatial stability through the identiﬁcation of similarity between multiple spatial point pattern datasets. To date, this test has been used in a variety of contexts. The initial application of the test was an investigation of the similarity of spatial patterns across crime types (Andresen 2009), but the test has also been used to investigate: changing patterns of international trade (Andresen 2010), the stability of crime patterns (Andresen and Malleson 2011), the spatial impact of the aggregation of crime types (Andresen and Linning 2012), the spatial dimension of the seasonality of crime (Andresen and Malleson 2013a; Linning 2015), the impact of modiﬁable areal units on spatial patterns (Andresen and Malleson 2013b), the role of local analysis in the investigation of crime displacement (Andresen and Malleson 2014), and the comparison of open source crime data and actual police data (Tompson et al. 2015).

The spatial point pattern test is summarized as follows, initially considering a pairwise test for simplicity. The ﬁrst step is to identify one point-based data set as the base (2003 mischief, for example) and calculate the percentage of points within each spatial unit under analysis (street segments and street intersections, for example); second, the other pointbased data set is deemed the test data (2013 mischief, for example), and randomly sampled with replacement for 85 % of the test data (this allows for the calculation of the percentage of points within each spatial unit under analysis and 85 % is based on the research by

Ratcliffe (2004)); third, repeat this sampling process 200 times4; fourth, calculate the 200 percentages, rank them, and remove the top and bottom 2.5 % to generate a 95 % conﬁdence interval; ﬁfth, if the value within a spatial unit of analysis for the base data set (2003 mischief, for example) is within the 95 % conﬁdence interval, that spatial unit of analysis is similar; and sixth, repeat this last step for all spatial units of analysis. Further details are available in Andresen (2009) and Andresen and Malleson (2011).

A global statistic can be calculated using the output from the statistical testing, outlined above. This statistic measures the degree of similarity between the two datasets, the similarity index, S. The similarity index ranges between 0 (no similarity) and 1 (perfect similarity), calculated as follows:

Pn i¼1 si n ð1Þ

S ¼

where si is equal 1 if the pattern of two datasets are similar and 0 otherwise (this similarity is deﬁned by step 5 described above), and n is the number of areas. Consequently, the similarity index measures the percentage of areas that share a similar pattern. In the literature that has used this spatial point pattern test, a rule of thumb has emerged to indicate the point at which S indicates similarity. This rule of thumb is similar to rules of thumb relating to multicollinearity in a regression context. The variance inﬂation factor (VIF) is often used as a regression diagnostic to indicate levels of multicollinearity that can cause issues with inference, most often when the VIF is in the range of 5–10 (O’Brien 2007). Though the VIF can be calculated with many explanatory variables, the range of 5–10 is equivalent to a bivariate correlation of 0.80–0.90. As such, an S-Index value of 0.80 is considered to represent two spatial point patterns that are similar. Though not practical with over 18,000 spatial units under analysis, it is important to note that the results of this test can be mapped showing the local level results, si (Andresen 2009). We used the graphical user interface (GUI) that was developed for the application of this spatial point pattern test that can perform the pairwise version of this spatial point pattern test.5

The nature of the spatial point pattern test, as described and executed in the GUI, undertakes pairwise comparisons of spatial point patterns. Though instructive, as shown below, such pairwise tests are limited with regard to the investigation of spatial stability. For example, subsequent pairwise comparisons (2003–2004, 2003–2005, 2003–2006, and so on) may indicate high degrees of similarity, S C 0.90. However, if the 10 % of nonsimilar spatial units changes with every pairwise comparison, by the time 10 years have passed spatial similarity will actually be quite low.

In order to address this limitation of previous research using this spatial point pattern test, we contribute to this literature through an expansion/extension of Andresen’s (2009) spatial point pattern test by making it longitudinal in order to properly assess the stability of spatial trajectories. This is done by allowing for multiple ‘‘test’’ data sets. In the current analysis, 2003 is still considered the base data set. However, all other subsequent years are independently considered test data sets, repeatedly randomly sampled, and used to calculate conﬁdence intervals for statistical testing—a conﬁdence interval is generated for each year to be compared to the base data set.

- 4 Often in the spatial analysis literature 50 repeated samples are used (Davis and Keller 1997). However, early research on Monte Carlo experiments by statisticians showed that as few as 20 repeated samples would provide good results (Hope 1968). We use a 200 repeated random sample for the purposes of being conservative and to provide convenient cut-off values for the conﬁdence interval.
- 5 https://github.com/nickmalleson/spatialtest


The possible outcomes from this longitudinal version of the spatial point pattern test are illustrated in Fig. 1. In Fig. 1, each dashed horizontal line represents the base year percentage. Each of the vertical lines represents the conﬁdence interval for each of the test data sets, years in the current analysis. Figure 1 only shows 8 years of data (1 base year and 7 test years), so it is for illustrative purposes, not representing all of the years in the current analysis.

The ﬁrst possibility of a completely stable spatial trajectory is shown in Fig. 1a. As stated above, the dashed horizontal line represents the percentage of points in the base data set that are assigned to each spatial unit (street segment or intersection in the current analysis). By deﬁnition, this percentage is considered constant for the study period because the base data set is the baseline from which any deviations in the spatial patterns are measured for each year. The vertical lines represent the conﬁdence intervals for each subsequent test year that are generated from the repeated sampling procedure. In each case within Fig. 1a, the base data percentage is within the conﬁdence intervals so this particular spatial unit would be considered having a stable spatial trajectory. It is important to note here that a stable spatial trajectory is not necessarily the same as a stable trajectory as deﬁned in other crime and place research (Curman et al. 2015; Weisburd et al. 2004). In the

Fig. 1 Spatial point pattern test, spatial trajectories

current context, a stable spatial trajectory is one in which a spatial unit of analysis has the same percentage of points; as such, the volume of crime may be going up or down but it is changing proportionately.

Figure 1b shows the situation of crime no longer occurring on a particular spatial unitthe latter conﬁdence intervals are only present on the x-axis, and made smaller, for illustrative purposes. In this particular case, crime has a stable spatial trajectory for the ﬁrst few years and then crime disappears; a new level of stability is found in this case. This situation becomes important below. A volatile spatial trajectory is represented in Fig. 1c. In this scenario, sometimes the conﬁdence intervals for the test years include the base year percentage and other times they do not. And ﬁnally, Fig. 1d shows no stability in the spatial pattern: after 2003 the percentage of points has completely changed.

From these possibilities, three new S-Indices are calculated. The ﬁrst, SAbsolute, represents Fig. 1a: the percentage of spatial units of analysis (street segments and street intersections) that exhibit total spatial stability. The second, SZero, is calculated in a similar manner but considers any spatial unit of analysis that exhibits the pattern in Fig. 1b to also be a stable spatial trajectory. Of course this is not true in an absolute sense, hence the names of the ﬁrst two indices, but it represents the situation when crime stops occurring in a place altogether: it found a new ‘‘stability’’. And third, SSum, is an index that represents all of the times when the base and test values are similar most of the time. As such, this index does not ‘‘punish’’ a spatial unit of analysis and classify it as dissimilar when it is only dissimilar one or two times over a longer study period. This situation is represented in

- Fig. 1c with 5 of the 7 years being classiﬁed as similar: 5/7 = 0.71. So, such a spatial unit of analysis is not stable in an absolute sense, but is generally stable over longer periods of time.


These three indices each also take 2 forms. The ﬁrst considers all street segments and street intersections whether they have crime or not. This is the closest similarity to the previous trajectory modeling in crime and place. The places that always have zero crime would be classiﬁed as low crime and stable trajectories. The second only considers street segments and intersections that actually have crime. This form of the index can identify the degree of spatial stability where crime actually occurs without being inﬂuenced by the places that never have criminal activity. In order to make these calculations the non-zero street segments and street intersections were deﬁned as any street segment of intersection that had at least one crime over the study period; for consistency, this same deﬁnition was used for the pairwise comparisons as well. Consequently, when two or more point data sets are compared, the set of street segments and intersections is complete such that all points have a street segment of intersection to be placed on. With three indices and two forms of their calculations, each crime type will have six new S-Index values to be considered for their longitudinal spatial trajectories.

Results

Descriptive Accounts of Crime Types over Time

The context of decreasing property crime in Vancouver is shown in Table 1 and Fig. 2. Table 1 shows the counts of the four different crime types (commercial burglary, mischief, theft from vehicle, theft of vehicle) as well as their aggregate. In 2003, the most common form of property crime is theft from vehicle, followed by mischief and theft of vehicle

(effectively the same levels) and commercial burglary. However, by 2013, theft of vehicle has become the lowest volume property crime under analysis. Overall, the crime drop for the aggregate of these crime types is 53.9 %, a large magnitude decrease in crime over an 11-year period. The distribution of this crime drop is not uniform across the four crime types though. As would be expected because of volume, theft from vehicle is the most similar to the aggregate, with commercial burglary also exhibiting a similar drop. Mischief, however, exhibits a notable lower magnitude crime drop (35.3 %) and theft of vehicle exhibits a substantial drop over this time period (83.8 %)—this drop has been conﬁrmed through conversations with police and vehicle insurance agencies as well as with checks using other statistical sources.

This drop is further represented in Fig. 2 that shows the crime rates for the City of Vancouver, calculated using the census population and linear interpolation for intervening years. In order to facilitate a comparison across crime types, all crime rates for 2003 were normalized to an index value of 100. Because of the small magnitude population change relative to the changes in the crime counts (population increased just below 10 %, 2003–2013), there are no major differences between Table 1 and Fig. 2, but the magnitude of the drop in theft of vehicle is immediately apparent. This result is interesting in and of itself, but is beyond the scope of the current analysis.

Turning to crime concentrations, Table 2 shows the percentage of street segments and intersections that have any events for the four property crime types. In the aggregate, only 35 % of Vancouver had criminal events in 2003 and this fell to just over 25 % by 2013. This shows that in 2013, essentially 75 % of Vancouver was free from reported criminal activity for these crime types. Already this is a high degree of concentration. When considering individual crime types, this concentration becomes more apparent. Commercial burglary has remained relatively stable in the percentage of locations it occurs, 4.5–7 %. However, it should be noted that commercial burglary can only occur where there is commercial or mixed land use. As such, the high degree of concentration for this crime type is at least partially ‘‘artiﬁcial’’ and a product of the urban landscape. However, the spatial concentration of commercial burglary will be clearly evident in subsequent tables.

- Table 1 Count of crime types, Vancouver, 2003–2013 Aggregate Commercial burglary Mischief Theft from vehicle Theft of vehicle


- 2003 32,082 3181 6270 16,459 6172
- 2004 31,754 3259 5510 17,042 5943
- 2005 28,118 2623 4968 15,641 4886
- 2006 25,860 2828 5199 14,227 3606
- 2007 22,332 2430 4825 11,857 3220
- 2008 20,816 2216 5345 10,924 2331
- 2009 17,680 1830 4380 9626 1844
- 2010 15,729 1625 4376 8307 1421
- 2011 14,390 1608 4596 7132 1054
- 2012 14,585 1648 4124 7714 1099
- 2013 14,784 1727 4057 8000 1000 Crime drop (%) 53.9 45.7 35.3 51.4 83.8


- Fig. 2 The crime drop in Vancouver, 2003–2013


- Table 2 Percent of street segments and street intersections with any crime Aggregate Commercial burglary Mischief Theft from vehicle Theft of vehicle


- 2003 34.77 6.41 16.62 24.87 17.86
- 2004 36.58 6.81 15.89 27.05 18.77
- 2005 35.41 6.40 14.69 26.22 16.99
- 2006 32.32 6.45 15.01 23.25 13.07
- 2007 30.14 5.80 13.44 20.71 12.13
- 2008 28.24 5.59 14.53 18.64 9.28
- 2009 27.86 5.03 13.41 18.86 8.18
- 2010 27.57 4.49 12.71 19.50 6.45
- 2011 26.39 4.49 12.93 18.09 4.98
- 2012 26.50 4.90 12.29 19.01 5.13
- 2013 26.24 5.21 11.75 19.06 4.55


Mischief has exhibited an increase in it spatial concentration over the study period of approximately 30 %. Theft from vehicle and theft of vehicle both show increases in the spatial concentration of their criminal events, but the drop has been of a greater magnitude for theft of vehicle. In conjunction with the knowledge that there has been a substantial drop in the volume of theft of vehicle, this is an indication that theft of vehicle is no longer occurring in particular locations. Again, though beyond the scope of the current analysis, this is an intriguing spatial change.

Keeping in mind that all of the criminal events associated with these four crime types can be considered spatially concentrated based on the percentages in Table 2, Table 3 shows the percentage of street segments and street intersections that account for 50 % of criminal events in Vancouver. In the aggregate, these numbers have not changed over time that is worthy of any discussion. However, with only 3–4.5 % of street segments and intersections required to account for 50 % of these criminal events, this is a high degree of spatial concentration that is in line with previous research (Sherman et al. 1989; Weisburd 2015). Commercial burglary only requires just over 1 % of locations to account for 50 % of its criminal events and this percentage is stable over time. Theft from vehicle is also generally stable over time, with some variability, at approximately 3 %. However, mischief and theft of vehicle are exhibiting decreases in the percentage of locations required to account for 50 % of their criminal events: 3.5–2.5 % and 5–2 %, respectively. As such, not only are these crime types spatially concentrated, but there is a concentration within that general concentration; moreover, this latter concentration is becoming more pronounced over time.

In the ﬁnal investigation of crime concentrations, Table 4 shows the percentage of street segments and street intersections with any crime that are required to account for 50 % of criminal events. Such a statistic identiﬁes concentrations within concentrations as well and accounts for land use issues for commercial burglary. Overall, for the aggregate, 11–14 % of locations that have any crime are required to account for 50 % of criminal events. This is a high degree of spatial concentration within an already small percentage of places that have any crime. There is a moderate decrease in this measure of spatial concentration, indicating that criminal events are becoming relatively more uniform over time, but this is not surprising given that the percentage locations with any crime has been decreasing. Commercial burglary and theft from vehicle show similar moderate increases in the percentage of locations with any crime required to account for 50 % of criminal events. Mischief, contrary to the other crime types, though with some variability, has remained relatively constant at approximately 20 %.

The largest magnitude change is with regard to theft of vehicle. The percentage of locations with any crime required to account for 50 % of criminal events has increased

- Table 3 Percent of street segments and street intersections that account for 50 % of crime Aggregate Commercial burglary Mischief Theft from vehicle Theft of vehicle


- 2003 3.75 1.20 3.34 2.50 4.27
- 2004 4.34 1.23 3.49 3.10 4.96
- 2005 4.46 1.31 3.37 3.17 4.77
- 2006 3.68 1.26 3.22 2.50 3.59
- 2007 3.21 1.13 2.75 2.10 3.40
- 2008 2.86 1.19 2.80 1.65 2.69
- 2009 3.37 1.08 3.12 2.24 3.18
- 2010 3.85 1.01 2.68 3.12 2.60
- 2011 3.75 0.92 2.46 3.21 2.12
- 2012 3.84 1.16 2.61 3.18 2.15
- 2013 3.60 1.21 2.41 2.93 1.84


- Table 4 Percent of street segments and street intersections with any crime that account for 50 % of crime Aggregate Commercial burglary Mischief Theft from vehicle Theft of vehicle

- 2003 10.79 18.68 20.10 10.05 23.92
- 2004 11.87 18.06 21.94 11.47 26.42
- 2005 12.59 20.41 22.96 12.10 28.05
- 2006 11.37 19.60 21.46 10.77 27.47
- 2007 10.67 19.55 20.49 10.13 28.03
- 2008 10.14 21.24 19.25 8.87 28.99
- 2009 12.11 21.47 23.29 11.87 38.90
- 2010 13.96 22.44 21.11 16.01 40.34
- 2011 14.20 20.39 18.99 17.74 42.59
- 2012 14.48 23.70 21.22 16.74 41.97
- 2013 13.72 23.20 20.53 15.36 40.41


- Table 5 Indices of similarity, 2003–2013, Vancouver, commercial burglary, street segments and intersections and non-zero street segments and intersections


from 24 to 40 %. As such, though the percentage of locations with any theft of vehicle has decreased substantially, the spatial distribution within that spatial concentration has become very close to uniform. With fewer places theft of vehicle is occurring, however, such as result is not unexpected but interesting nonetheless.

Pairwise Spatial Point Pattern Results

The results of the pairwise spatial point pattern tests for spatial stability are shown in Tables 5, 6, 7 and 8. In each table, the upper-right triangle represents the spatial point pattern test results using all street segments and street intersections, whereas the lower-left

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

- 2003 0.940 0.941 0.939 0.941 0.938 0.940 0.940 0.939 0.940 0.939
- 2004 0.678 0.937 0.939 0.938 0.942 0.939 0.947 0.936 0.943 0.936
- 2005 0.681 0.659 0.940 0.941 0.942 0.940 0.949 0.941 0.944 0.940
- 2006 0.668 0.672 0.679 0.941 0.941 0.940 0.948 0.941 0.944 0.938
- 2007 0.682 0.664 0.682 0.680 0.949 0.946 0.951 0.945 0.946 0.945
- 2008 0.681 0.691 0.690 0.686 0.727 0.949 0.952 0.949 0.947 0.949
- 2009 0.680 0.770 0.681 0.675 0.713 0.732 0.957 0.952 0.951 0.951
- 2010 0.683 0.719 0.727 0.723 0.735 0.740 0.770 0.957 0.950 0.957
- 2011 0.672 0.662 0.681 0.685 0.708 0.727 0.744 0.764 0.953 0.957
- 2012 0.675 0.694 0.702 0.697 0.706 0.725 0.739 0.729 0.750 0.954
- 2013 0.675 0.655 0.674 0.670 0.703 0.720 0.734 0.767 0.765 0.754


triangle represents the spatial point pattern test results only using street segments and street intersections that have at least one criminal event in any given year. This is a sensitivity analysis that we perform because all of the zero-values may artiﬁcially inﬂate the S-Index values, indicating spatial stability when it is not present within the places that experience crime. This set of street segments and street intersections is different for each crime type under analysis, but the same for all pairwise comparisons in order to be consistent with the longitudinal analyses.

The results for commercial burglary are shown in Table 5. Though we do not want to consider the threshold value for the S-Index of 0.80 in a dichotomous fashion, the upperright triangle of Table 5 clearly shows a high degree of spatial stability from year-to-year as well as over the entire study period; S-Index values are all[0.935. This bodes well for the spatial analysis of any given year of data and making inferential statements regarding theoretical processes and the development of criminal justice policy, speciﬁcally crime prevention initiatives. The results for sensitivity analysis, only considering non-zero street segments and street intersections, is not as favorable for spatial stability, particularly for the early years in our study period. When comparing over time and year-to-year, there are very few S-Index values [0.70, 2003–2006. Only in the more recent years of the study period do the S-Index values approach the threshold of 0.80, indicating spatial stability. Therefore, when considering the entire city there appears to be a high degree of spatial stability for commercial burglary, but when considering only those locations where crime occurs, spatial stability only emerges in more recent years. This indicates that there has been some degree of spatial change in the years of the crime drop for commercial burglary in Vancouver.

The results for mischief, Table 6, are very similar to those for commercial burglary. The S-Index values in the upper-right triangle of the table are always[0.84, indicating spatial stability when considering the entire city. The sensitivity analysis does show an increasing degree of spatial stability in more recent years, but the S-Index values are greater than

- Table 6 Indices of similarity, 2003–2013, Vancouver, mischief, street segments and intersections and nonzero street segments and intersections


2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

- 2003 0.844 0.845 0.843 0.845 0.842 0.841 0.843 0.843 0.842 0.844
- 2004 0.700 0.848 0.854 0.848 0.855 0.850 0.857 0.849 0.860 0.847
- 2005 0.703 0.709 0.858 0.859 0.859 0.859 0.872 0.860 0.864 0.857
- 2006 0.696 0.720 0.728 0.855 0.857 0.857 0.858 0.857 0.863 0.857
- 2007 0.701 0.710 0.729 0.722 0.863 0.871 0.873 0.869 0.878 0.869
- 2008 0.695 0.722 0.728 0.727 0.738 0.860 0.860 0.861 0.863 0.858
- 2009 0.697 0.711 0.730 0.726 0.755 0.733 0.877 0.870 0.880 0.871
- 2010 0.701 0.728 0.754 0.728 0.756 0.732 0.762 0.878 0.878 0.877
- 2011 0.699 0.712 0.730 0.727 0.748 0.735 0.753 0.766 0.880 0.876
- 2012 0.695 0.732 0.740 0.736 0.767 0.737 0.769 0.767 0.770 0.883
- 2013 0.700 0.708 0.726 0.726 0.751 0.728 0.754 0.761 0.761 0.774


- Table 7 Indices of similarity, 2003–2013, Vancouver, theft from vehicle, street segments and intersections and non-zero street segments and intersections

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

2003 0.765 0.762 0.758 0.765 0.765 0.771 0.771 0.768 0.768 0.774 2004 0.629 0.749 0.744 0.747 0.779 0.755 0.768 0.753 0.767 0.756 2005 0.627 0.604 0.772 0.755 0.784 0.750 0.769 0.757 0.770 0.762 2006 0.621 0.599 0.644 0.783 0.790 0.780 0.778 0.783 0.779 0.784 2007 0.632 0.604 0.615 0.661 0.817 0.805 0.787 0.801 0.788 0.799 2008 0.631 0.653 0.661 0.671 0.715 0.825 0.790 0.820 0.792 0.818 2009 0.640 0.616 0.618 0.655 0.693 0.726 0.812 0.819 0.797 0.816 2010 0.640 0.635 0.636 0.654 0.665 0.671 0.704 0.814 0.816 0.812 2011 0.635 0.611 0.617 0.657 0.687 0.717 0.716 0.819 0.827 2012 0.635 0.634 0.641 0.642 0.667 0.673 0.682 0.712 0.717 0.815 2013 0.645 0.619 0.637 0.661 0.686 0.714 0.712 0.705 0.728 0.709

Analyses using all street segments and intersections are in the upper right and analyses using non-zero street segments and intersections (sensitivity analysis) are in the lower left

- Table 8 Indices of similarity, 2003–2013, Vancouver, theft of vehicle, street segments and intersections and non-zero street segments and intersections


2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

- 2003 0.838 0.836 0.842 0.841 0.840 0.838 0.836 0.832 0.832 0.829
- 2004 0.665 0.831 0.849 0.832 0.869 0.831 0.890 0.824 0.900 0.821
- 2005 0.662 0.651 0.857 0.842 0.887 0.848 0.904 0.839 0.912 0.836
- 2006 0.673 0.686 0.703 0.877 0.893 0.882 0.914 0.877 0.927 0.874
- 2007 0.671 0.652 0.672 0.747 0.896 0.889 0.921 0.885 0.930 0.883
- 2008 0.669 0.733 0.765 0.778 0.784 0.913 0.927 0.911 0.938 0.910
- 2009 0.666 0.650 0.685 0.756 0.769 0.819 0.930 0.922 0.942 0.922
- 2010 0.660 0.772 0.801 0.824 0.837 0.848 0.855 0.939 0.945 0.936
- 2011 0.651 0.634 0.665 0.746 0.762 0.817 0.840 0.874 0.952 0.950
- 2012 0.651 0.793 0.818 0.846 0.853 0.872 0.879 0.884 0.884 0.950
- 2013 0.645 0.629 0.660 0.740 0.759 0.815 0.838 0.869 0.898 0.897


Analyses using all street segments and intersections are in the upper right and analyses using non-zero street segments and intersections (sensitivity analysis) are in the lower left

those for commercial burglary and approach the threshold value of 0.80 sooner, beginning in 2005.

Table 7 shows the results of the spatial point pattern test for theft from vehicle. The SIndex values in the upper-right triangle for the entire city are now mostly below the threshold value of 0.80, but still quite close so it would be difﬁcult to argue that there is not a high degree of spatial stability from 2003 to 2013 in Vancouver. However, more similar to commercial burglary, the results of the sensitivity analysis for theft from vehicle indicate that there is not spatial stability in the set of locations that actually have criminal events of

this type. With S-Index values most often below 0.70 the case for spatial stability is difﬁcult to make, even in the more recent years under analysis.

And ﬁnally, Table 8 shows the S-Index values of the spatial point patterns test for theft of vehicle. As with the previous results, those for theft of vehicle are arguably the most interesting. When considering the entire city, the S-Index values are always [0.83, indicating a high degree of spatial stability in theft of vehicle. Additionally, in the more recent years, 2010–2013, the S-Index values are all[0.90, similar to the results for commercial burglary. As such, there is strong evidence for the presence of spatial stability at the level of the city even with the large magnitude crime drop, 2003–2013. When only considering the street segments and street intersections with any crime in the sensitivity analysis, the early years in the study period do not exhibit a high degree of spatial stability, but in more recent years, 2005–2013, there is strong evidence for spatial stability with increasing values of the S-Index. This is particularly true for 2008–2013. This evidence for spatial stability in theft of vehicle is particularly interesting given the large magnitude crime that has occurred for this crime type in Vancouver over the study period.

Longitudinal Spatial Trajectories, 2003–2013

The overall pattern for the four crime types under investigation is relatively consistent. When considering all street segments and intersections the S-Indices are generally all above 0.80—theft from vehicle is the exception but those values are all very close to 0.80—and when considering non-zero street segments and street intersections, earlier SIndices were moderately high (0.60–0.70) and approaching the threshold of similarity in the later pairwise comparisons. This latter increase in the S-Index values is likely due to the retention of all street segments and intersections in the data that have at least one criminal event in conjunction with the crime drop—the situation represented in Fig. 1b.

Despite the appearance of spatial stability, such pairwise comparisons, though instructive, may not provide an accurate representation of spatial stability over longer periods of time. In order to account for this possibility, the spatial point pattern test was also conducted in a longitudinal manner to investigate the spatial trajectories to account for the stability of crime patterns. These results are all shown in Table 9.

Considering all street segments and intersections to be most consistent with the more traditional trajectory analyses in the crime and place literature, commercial burglary shows a remarkable degree of spatial stability over the 11-year study period—this is not an unexpected result given that commercial land use is present in a small proportion of the city. Similarly, mischief, theft from vehicle, and theft of vehicle all surpass the threshold of

- Table 9 Indices of Similarity, spatial trajectories, 2003–2014 All street segments and intersections Non-zero street segments and intersections SAbsolute SZero SSum SAbsolute SZero SSum n


Commercial burglary 0.901 0.946 0.941 0.470 0.709 0.681 3430 Mischief 0.740 0.874 0.845 0.502 0.759 0.704 9625 Theft from vehicle 0.673 0.823 0.803 0.373 0.661 0.628 9625 Theft of vehicle 0.762 0.953 0.838 0.506 0.903 0.664 8899

0.80 for the SZero and SSum Indices. It should be noted, however, that these two indices do not measure spatial stability in its purest sense. SZero includes places that have seen potentially dramatic crime decreases but have found a new ‘‘stability’’, and SSum includes places that may be sporadic but will only impact the degree of similarity when a spatial unit of analysis is generally stable with a few aberrations. As such, it is very important to also use the index that measure pure, or absolute, stability, the SAbsolute Index. Though the SAbsolute Index values are all below the 0.80 threshold for all crime types aside from commercial burglary, mischief and theft of vehicle have SAbsolute Index values that are approaching the threshold and theft from vehicle has a moderately high index value. Overall, particularly if one considers the crime drop leading to zero crime in some places, the spatial trajectories of these crime types in Vancouver are remarkably stable over time.

Considering the non-zero street segments and intersections, stability is not as high, showing the importance of removing the zero-values when considering the stability of crime patterns in a supplementary analysis. Street segments and intersections that do not have any crime over the study period is a form of stability. Consequently, this is an important result that needs to be identiﬁed. However, if the researcher is interested in knowing how stable spatial crime patterns are in those places in which crime actually occurs, a supplementary analysis that only considers non-zero spatial units of analysis becomes important. Considering non-zero street segments and intersections, all crime types have SAbsolute Index values\0.51 indicating a low level of stability over the study period. However, the SZero and SSum Indices are approaching the 0.80 threshold (and achieving that threshold for theft of vehicle), indicating a moderate degree of stability in crime patterns particularly if one considers the crime drop represented in Fig. 1b.

These results show that the pairwise comparisons discussed above are generally consistent with the longitudinal spatial trajectories. However, caution must be undertaken when making longer-term inferences from pairwise comparisons.

Discussion

In this paper, we have investigated crime concentrations and the spatial stability of crime patterns for four property crime types in Vancouver, British Columbia, 2003–2013. With regard to crime concentrations, we ﬁnd that crime is highly concentrated in few locations in Vancouver. And, in most cases, these crime concentrations have been increasing while crime volumes have been decreasing. This is a particularly interesting phenomenon that needs further investigation. In the case of Vancouver, two things are occurring. First, crime is going down almost everywhere. This overall decrease was present in previous research on Vancouver (Curman et al. 2015) and in the current data. Also, the crime types investigated in this paper have disappeared from particular street segments and street intersections. Overall for the city, 65 % of Vancouver was free from these (police-reported) crime types in 2003 compared to 75 % of Vancouver in 2013. With lower volumes of crime, fewer micro-places are necessary to account for 50 % of the criminal events, as evidenced in Tables 2 and 3.

Perhaps more interesting is the consideration of Table 4. When considering all of the street segments and intersections, crime is dropping and becoming more concentrated. However, when one considers only the places in which crime is occurring, crime is becoming more dispersed—mischief is the exception. So, there is less crime, it is occurring in fewer places, but within those fewer places the distribution of criminal events is

becoming more evenly distributed, particularly for theft of vehicle. Why? Consider the case of theft of vehicle. This crime type exhibited a decrease in criminal events that was approximately 84 %, whereas the percentage of street segments and intersections (microplaces) with any theft of vehicle dropped by approximately 75 %. At the same time, the percentage of micro-places that account for 50 % of criminal events decreased by a little more than one-half. Given that the percentage of micro-places with any theft of vehicle decreased by a greater degree than the percentage of micro-places that account for 50 % of theft of vehicle, the percentage of micro-places with any thefts of vehicle that account for 50 % of thefts of vehicle must necessarily increase. There were simply fewer places for those criminal events to occur.

Consequently, those researching crime at places and spatial concentrations must be cautious to not take these statistics at face value. They are important and tell a story of changes in spatial patterns of crime, but they should not impress us at face value. This is similar to a crime type that is relatively rare, say 1000 events over the course of a year, that is counted in the context of micro-places. If there are 10,000 micro-places and one criminal event per micro-place, the minimum level of concentration over the entire city is 10 %: 1000/10,000. Stating that 90 % of the city is free from this crime type seems to be an impressive concentration, but such a ‘‘concentration’’ is actually uniform—it isn’t a concentration at all. This is precisely the case for theft of vehicle in Vancouver during 2013: 1000 criminal events, approximately 20,000 micro-places and approximately 5 % of the entire city that experiences this crime type. In fact, the most dispersed this crime type can be is being present in 5.4 % of micro-places. Consequently, theft of vehicle is hardly concentrated at all when one considers the number of possible places it can occur; therefore, the need for 40 % of micro-places to account for 50 % of criminal events makes perfect sense. Yes, this crime type is incredibly concentrated within the entire city, but we must consider the nature and possibilities of that concentration given our chosen spatial units of analysis.

The ﬂipside of these concentrations is the degree of change in the spatial patterns of crime. With 35 % of micro-places having one of these four crime types in 2003 and only 25 % in 2013, there is a lot of crime concentration at both points in time. However, there has also been substantial change. As shown using the longitudinal version of the spatial point pattern test (Table 9), a lot of the change can be explained considering those microplaces that cease to have criminal events (Fig. 1b): the SAbsolute Index versus the SZero Index. But where is the rest of the change occurring? Part of this change is occurring through the simple mathematics of places described above: crime concentrations change because there is nowhere else for the criminal events to go that will not impact the spatial stability of crime and, hence, the spatial trajectories. This does not mean that we do not need to investigate any socio-demographic or socio-economic changes that have led to subsequent changes in crime patterns, but we must recognize that a lot of the changes shown above can be understood based on simple explanations: crime just stopped occurring in particular places and became more evenly dispersed as a result. However, sociodemographics and/or socio-economics may come into play to understand why particular micro-places no longer had crime, but this is beyond the scope of the current paper.

Returning to the question of whether the law of crime concentration at places is simply a manifestation of the concentration of human activities more generally, we begin to shed light on this question through a comparison of the results for commercial burglary and vehicle-related crime. Vehicle-related crime can occur wherever there is the presence of vehicles, whereas commercial burglary can only occur where there is commercial or mixed land use, by deﬁnition. Consequently, if the law of crime concentration at places is simply

a speciﬁc manifestation of the concentration of human activities, more generally, commercial burglary will always be more concentrated than vehicle-related crime. General support for this proposition is found in Tables 2 and 3, given that commercial burglary is always more concentrated than theft from vehicle and more concentrated than theft of vehicle in all but one case. However, because the degrees of concentration for commercial burglary and theft of vehicle are converging over time, this shows that the concentration of human activities is not enough to explain the law of crime concentration at places. This will prove to be an interesting avenue of future research, considering speciﬁc crime types and the availability of opportunities based on the general concentrations of human activities.

Overall, when considering spatial stability for the entire city, we ﬁnd strong evidence for the presence of spatial stability. This bodes well for theoretical testing and development as well as the development of criminal justice policy, speciﬁcally crime prevention initiatives. When only considering street segments and street intersections that have any crime, the results for spatial stability are less promising for any general statements. Theft of vehicle shows the greatest degree of spatial stability in the sensitivity analyses, but generally speaking spatial stability in the locations that actually have crime has a shorter time horizon.

The implications for theory from these results are that there is a relatively high degree of spatial stability at the level of the city. As such, if the testing of theory and any subsequent reﬁnements are based on city-level analyses, using street segments or census tracts as the units of analysis, for example, there are probably not going to be any difﬁculties. However, if local area analyses are being undertaken to investigate the nuances of theoretical predictions, then caution should be undertaken for generalizing if a longer period of time has elapsed. This is especially the case when the volume of crime is changing.

In the context of criminal justice policy, speciﬁcally crime prevention initiatives, the same general statements can be made. However, speciﬁcally in the case of situational crime prevention that is quite spatially-speciﬁc, the importance of having recent crime data is paramount. Even with S-Index values[0.80 there is still a great degree of spatial change occurring: 20 % of 18,455 spatial units of analysis is still 3689 street segments and street intersections that are exhibiting change. An argument for spatial stability can be made for the overall crime pattern, but this may not be spatially stable enough for situational crime prevention.

Though instructive, our analyses are not without their limitations. First and foremost, we are restricted to police-reported crime data and a small number of crime types. There is little we can do regarding this limitation, however. Relatedly, one of these crime types (mischief), as mentioned above, is sensitive to police reporting, citizen reporting, and police patrol activities; however, mischief does not present any results that are qualitatively different from the other crime types. Second, our data do not have speciﬁc addresses or geographic coordinates available, but we do restrict all inference to the street segment or street intersection in order to avoid the ecological fallacy. And third, our time frame is only 11 years. Though there are not many longitudinal criminal event data sets available there is little that can be done regarding this limitation aside from waiting for more years to pass, assuming more years of data will continue to be available for these cities. However, with evidence of spatial stability in the 10 years prior to this study (Curman et al. 2015), we should be able to move forward with cautious optimism with regard to spatial stability.

As with most research, our analyses raise more questions than answered and these guide future directions for research. First and foremost is the importance of further replication. In order to move forward with (social) science, our results must be replicated in other

contexts: are spatial trajectories stable over time in other cities? Second, traditional trajectory analyses of these data would prove to be instructive. A comparison of the results presented here considering the spatial trajectory should be compared with the various classiﬁcations that would emerge from a traditional trajectory analysis. Are the various clusters of traditional trajectories when compared with the locations that exhibit spatial stability or not in the same places? It would be interesting to know if traditional trajectories classiﬁed as stable would include the street segments and street intersections that are classiﬁed as spatially stable using our longitudinal extension of Andresen’s (2009) spatial point pattern test, and vice versa. And ﬁnally, further investigations into the changing patterns of theft of vehicle are in order. With such a large magnitude crime drop and increasingly concentrated crime types, there are most certainly interesting patterns emerging.

References

- Andresen MA (2009) Testing for similarity in area-based spatial patterns: a nonparametric Monte Carlo approach. Appl Geogr 29:333–345
- Andresen MA (2010) Canada—United States interregional trade: quasi-points and spatial change. Can Geogr 54:139–157


Andresen MA, Linning SJ (2012) The (in)appropriateness of aggregating across crime types. Appl Geogr 35:275–282 Andresen MA, Malleson N (2011) Testing the stability of crime patterns: implications for theory and policy. J Res Crime Delinq 48:58–82

- Andresen MA, Malleson N (2013a) Spatial heterogeneity in crime analysis. In: Leitner M (ed) Crime modeling and mapping using geospatial technologies. Springer, New York, pp 3–23
- Andresen MA, Malleson N (2013b) Crime seasonality and its variations across space. Appl Geogr 43:25–35 Andresen MA, Malleson N (2014) Police foot patrol and crime displacement: a local analysis. J Contemp


Crim Justice 30:186–199 Boyce J, Cotter A, Perreault S (2014) Police-reported crime statistics in Canada, 2013. Statistics Canada, Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics, Ottawa

Braga A, Hureau DM, Papachristos AV (2011) The relevance of micro places to citywide robbery trends: a longitudinal analysis of robbery incidents at street corners and block faces in Boston. J Res Crime Delinq 48:7–32

Bursik RJ Jr (1988) Social disorganization and theories of crime and delinquency: problems and prospects. Criminology 26:519–551 Curman ASN, Andresen MA, Brantingham PJ (2015) Crime and place: a longitudinal examination of street segment patterns in Vancouver, BC. J Quant Criminol 31:127–147 Davis TJ, Keller CP (1997) Modelling uncertainty in natural resource analysis using fuzzy sets and Monte Carlo simulation: slope stability prediction. Int J Geogr Inf Sci 11:409–434 Farrell G, Tseloni A, Mailley J, Tilley N (2011) The crime drop and the security hypothesis. J Res Crime

Delinq 48:147–175 Farrell G, Tilley N, Tseloni A (2015) Why the crime drop? Crime Justice 43:421–490 Groff ER, Weisburd D, Yang S-M (2010) Is it important to examine crime trends at a local ‘‘micro’’ level?:

a longitudinal analysis of street to street variability in crime trajectories. J Quant Criminol 26:7–32 Hope ACA (1968) A simpliﬁed Monte Carlo signiﬁcance test procedure. J R Stat Soc B 30:583–598 Kong R (1997) Canadian crime statistics, 1996. Statistics Canada, Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics,

Ottawa Lees L, Slater T, Wyly EK (2007) Gentriﬁcation. Routledge, New York Linning SJ (2015) Crime seasonality and the micro-spatial patterns of property crime in Vancouver, BC and

Ottawa, ON. J Crim Justice 43:544–555 O’Brien RM (2007) A caution regarding rules of thumb for variance inﬂation factors. Qual Quant 41:673–690 Ratcliffe JH (2004) Geocoding crime and a ﬁrst estimate of a minimum acceptable hit rate. Int J Geogr Inf Sci 18:61–72

Savoie J (2002) Crime statistics in Canada, 2001. Statistics Canada, Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics, Ottawa Shaw CR, McKay HD (1931) Social factors in juvenile delinquency. U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington

Shaw CR, McKay HD (1942) Juvenile delinquency and urban areas: a study of rates of delinquency in relation to differential characteristics of local communities in American cities. University of Chicago Press, Chicago

Shaw CR, McKay HD (1969) Juvenile delinquency and urban areas: a study of rates of delinquency in relation to differential characteristics of local communities in American cities, revised edn. University of Chicago Press, Chicago

Shaw CR, Zorbaugh F, McKay HD, Cottrell LS (1929) Delinquency areas: a study of the geographic distribution of school truants, juvenile delinquents, and adult offenders in Chicago. University of Chicago Press, Chicago

Sherman LW, Gartin PR, Buerger ME (1989) Hot spots of predatory crime: routine activities and the criminology of place. Criminology 27:27–55 Silver W (2007) Crime statistics in Canada, 2006. Statistics Canada, Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics, Ottawa Tompson L, Johnson S, Ashby M, Perkins C, Edwards P (2015) UK open source crime data: accuracy and possibilities for research. Cartogr Geogr Inf Sci 42:97–111 Tseloni A, Mailley J, Farrell G, Tilley N (2010) Exploring the international decline in crime rates. Eur J Criminol 7:375–394 Wallace M (2003) Crime statistics in Canada, 2002. Statistics Canada, Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics, Ottawa Wallace M (2004) Crime statistics in Canada, 2003. Statistics Canada, Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics, Ottawa

Weisburd D (2015) The law of crime concentration and the criminology of place. Criminology 53:133–157 Weisburd D, Amram S (2014) The law of concentrations of crime at place: the case of Tel Aviv-Jaffa. Police

Pract Res 15:101–114 Weisburd D, Bushway S, Lum C, Yang S-M (2004) Trajectories of crime at places: a longitudinal study of street segments in the City of Seattle. Criminology 42:283–321 Weisburd D, Morris NA, Groff ER (2009) Hot spots of juvenile crime: a longitudinal study of street segments in Seattle, Washington. J Quant Criminol 25:443–467 Weisburd D, Groff ER, Yang S-M (2012) The criminology of place: street segments and our understanding of the crime problem. Oxford University Press, New York

